Axiom I. The war machine is exterior to the State apparatus.

Proposition I. This exteriority is first attested to in mythol-
ogy, epic, drama, and games.

Georges Dumézil, in his definitive analyses of Indo-European mythol-
ogy, has shown that political sovereignty, or domination, has two heads:
the magician-king and the jurist-priest. Rex and flamen, raj and Brahman,
Romulus and Numa, Varuna and Mitra, the despot and the legislator, the
binder and the organizer. Undoubtedly, these two poles stand in opposi-
tion term by term, as the obscure and the clear, the violent and the calm,
the quick and the weighty, the fearsome and the regulated, the “bond” and
the “pact,” etc. But their opposition is only relative; they function as a pair,
in alternation, as though they expressed a division of the One or constitut-
ed in themselves a sovereign unity. “At once antithetical and complemen-
tary, necessary to one another and consequently without hostility, lacking
a mythology of conflict: a specification on any one level automatically calls
forth a homologous specification on another. The two together exhaust the
3
 
field of the function.” They are the principal elements of a State apparatus
nature and intrinsic properties from which their movements, situations,
that proceeds by a One-Two, distributes binary distinctions, and forms a
and confrontations derive. They have qualities; a knight remains a knight,
milieu of interiority. It is a double articulation that makes the State appa-
a pawn a pawn, a bishop a bishop. Each is like a subject of the statement
ratus into a stratum.

endowed with a relative power, and these relative powers combine in a
It will be noted that war is not contained within this apparatus. Either
subject of enunciation, that is, the chess player or the game’s form of
the State has at its disposal a violence that is not channeled through war—
interiority. Go pieces, in contrast, are pellets, disks, simple arithmetic
either it uses police officers and jailers in place of warriors, has no arms
units, and have only an anonymous, collective, or third-person function.

and no need of them, operates by immediate, magical capture, “seizes”
“It” makes a move. “It” could be a man, a woman, a louse, an elephant.

and “binds,” preventing all combat—or, the State acquires an army, but
Go pieces are elements of a nonsubjectified machine assemblage with no
in a way that presupposes a juridical integration of war and the organiza-
intrinsic properties, only situational ones. Thus the relations are very dif-
tion of a military function. As for the war machine in itself, it seems to be
ferent in the two cases. Within their milieu of interiority, chess pieces
irreducible to the State apparatus, to be outside its sovereignty and prior
entertain biunivocal relations with one another, and with the adversary’s
to its law: it comes from elsewhere. Indra, the warrior god, is in oppo-
pieces: their functioning is structural. On the other hand, a Go piece has
sition to Varuna no less than to Mitral He can no more be reduced to
only a milieu of exteriority, or extrinsic relations with nebulas or con-
one or the other than he can constitute a third of their kind. Rather, he is
stellations, according to which it fulfills functions of insertion or situa-
like a pure and immeasurable multiplicity, the pack, an irruption of the
tion, such as bordering, encircling, shattering. All by itself, a Go piece can
ephemeral and the power of metamorphosis. He unties the bond just
destroy an entire constellation synchronically; a chess piece cannot (or
as he betrays the pact. He brings a furor to bear against sovereignty, a
can do so diachronically only). Chess is indeed a war, but an institutional-
celerity against gravity, secrecy against the public, a power (puissance)
ized, regulated, coded war, with a front, a rear, battles. But what is proper
against sovereignty, a machine against the apparatus. He bears witness to
to Go is war without battle lines, with neither confrontation nor retreat,
another kind of justice, one of incomprehensible cruelty at times, but at
without battles even: pure strategy, whereas chess is a semiology. Finally,
others of unequaled pity as well (because he unties bonds...). He bears
the space is not at all the same: in chess, it is a question of arranging a
witness, above all, to other relations with women, with animals, because
closed space for oneself, thus of going from one point to another, of oc-
he sees all things in relations of becoming, rather than implementing
cupying the maximum number of squares with the minimum number
binary distributions between “states”: a veritable becoming-animal of the
of pieces. In Go, it is a question of arraying oneself in an open space, of
warrior, a becoming-woman, which lies outside dualities of terms as well
holding space, of maintaining the possibility of springing up at any point:
as correspondences between relations. In every respect, the war machine
the movement is not from one point to another, but becomes perpetual,
is of another species, another nature, another origin than the State ap-
without aim or destination, without departure or arrival. The “smooth”
paratus.

space of Go, as against the “striated” space of chess. The nomas of Go
Let us take a limited example and compare the war machine and the
against the State of chess, nomas against polis. The difference is that chess
State apparatus in the context of the theory of games. Let us take chess
codes and decodes space, whereas Go proceeds altogether differently, ter-
and Go, from the standpoint of the game pieces, the relations between the
ritorializing or deterritorializing it (make the outside a territory in space;
pieces and the space involved. Chess is a game of State, or of the court: the
consolidate that territory by the construction of a second, adjacent terri-
emperor of China played it. Chess pieces are coded; they have an internal
tory; deterritorialize the enemy by shattering his territory from within;
4
5
 
deterritorialize oneself by renouncing, by going elsewhere...). Another
of the two heads of the State apparatus. Sometimes it is confused with
justice, another movement, another space-time.

the magic violence of the State, at other times with the State’s military
“They come like fate, without reason, consideration, or pretext...” “In
institution. For instance, the war machine invents speed and secrecy; but
some way that is incomprehensible they have pushed right into the capital.

there is all the same a certain speed and a certain secrecy that pertain to the
At any rate, here they are; it seems that every morning there are more of
State, relatively, secondarily. So there is a great danger of identifying the
them.” Luc de Heusch analyzes a Bantu myth that leads us to the same
structural relation between the two poles of political sovereignty, and the
schema: Nkongolo, an indigenous emperor and administrator of public
dynamic interrelation of these two poles, with the power of war. Dumézil
works, a man of the public and a man of the police, gives his half-sisters to
cites the lineage of the Roman kings: there is a Romulus-Numa relation
the hunter Mbidi, who assists him and then leaves. Mbidi’s son, a man of
that recurs throughout a series, with variants and an alternation between
secrecy, joins up with his father, only to return from the outside with that
these two types of equally legitimate rulers; but there is also a relation
inconceivable thing, an army. He kills Nkongolo and proceeds to build
with an “evil king,” Tullus Hostilius, Tarquinius Superbus, an upsurge
a new State. “Between” the magical-despotic State and the juridical State
of the warrior as a disquieting and illegitimate character.8 Shakespeare’s
containing a military institution, we see the flash of the war machine,
kings could also be invoked: even violence, murders, and perversion do not
arriving from without.

prevent the State lineage from producing “good” kings; but a disturbing
From the standpoint of the State, the originality of the man of war, his
character like Richard III slips in, announcing from the outset his inten-
eccentricity, necessarily appears in a negative form: stupidity, deformity,
tion to reinvent a war machine and impose its line (deformed, treacherous
madness, illegitimacy, usurpation, sin. Dumézil analyzes the three “sins”
and traitorous, he claims a “secret close intent” totally different from the
of the warrior in the Indo-European tradition: against the king, against
conquest of State power, and another —an other—relation with women).

the priest, against the laws originating in the State (for example, a sexual
In short, whenever the irruption of war power is confused with the line of
transgression that compromises the distribution of men and women, or
State domination, everything gets muddled; the war machine can then be
even a betrayal of the laws of war as instituted by the State). The warrior
understood only through the categories of the negative, since nothing is
is in the position of betraying everything, including the function of the
left that remains outside the State. But, returned to its milieu of exterior-
military, or of understanding nothing. It happens that historians, both
ity, the war machine is seen to be of another species, of another nature,
bourgeois and Soviet, will follow this negative tradition and explain how
of another origin. One would have to say that it is located between the
Genghis Khan understood nothing: he “didn’t understand” the phenom-
two heads of the State, between the two articulations, and that it is neces-
enon of the city. An easy thing to say. The problem is that the exteriority
sary in order to pass from one to the other. But “between” the two, in that
of the war machine in relation to the State apparatus is everywhere appar-
instant, even ephemeral, if only a flash, it proclaims its own irreducibility.

ent but remains difficult to conceptualize. It is not enough to affirm that
The State has no war machine of its own; it can only appropriate one
the war machine is external to the apparatus. It is necessary to reach the
in the form of a military institution, one that will continually cause it
point of conceiving the war machine as itself a pure form of exteriority,
problems. This explains the mistrust States have toward their military
whereas the State apparatus constitutes the form of interiority we habitu-
institutions, in that the military institution inherits an extrinsic war
ally take as a model, or according to which we are in the habit of thinking.

machine. Karl von Clausewitz has a general sense of this situation when
What complicates everything is that this extrinsic power of the war ma-
he treats the flow of absolute war as an Idea that States partially appro-
chine tends, under certain circumstances, to become confused with one
priate according to their political needs, and in relation to which they are
6
7
 
more or less good “conductors.”
more than the disciplined, military organ of the State apparatus, or to
Trapped between the two poles of political sovereignty, the man of war
turn against itself to become a double suicide machine for a solitary man
seems outmoded, condemned, without a future, reduced to his own fury,
and a solitary woman? Goethe and Hegel, State thinkers both, see Kleist
which he turns against himself. The descendants of Hercules, Achilles,
as a monster, and Kleist has lost from the start. Why is it, then, that the
then Ajax, have enough strength left to proclaim their independence from
most uncanny modernity lies with him? It is because the elements of his
Agamemnon, a man of the old State. But they are powerless when it
work are secrecy, speed and affect.” And in Kleist the secret is no longer
comes to Ulysses, a man of the nascent modern State, the first man of
a content held within a form of interiority; rather, it becomes a form,
the modern State. And it is Ulysses who inherits Achilles’ arms, only to
identified with the form of exteriority that is always external to itself.

convert them to other uses, submitting them to the laws of the State—
Similarly, feelings become uprooted from the interiority of a “subject,”
not Ajax, who is condemned by the goddess he defied and against whom
to be projected violently outward into a milieu of pure exteriority that
he sinned. No one has portrayed the situation of the man of war, at once
lends them an incredible velocity, a catapulting force: love or hate, they
eccentric and condemned, better than Kleist. In Penthesilea, Achilles is
are no longer feelings but affects and these affects are so many instances
already separated from his power: the war machine has passed over to the
of the becoming-woman, the becoming-animal of the warrior (the bear,
Amazons, a Stateless woman-people whose justice, religion, and loves
she-dogs). Affects transpierce the body like arrows, they are weapons of
are organized uniquely in a war mode. Descendants of the Scythians,
war. The deterritorialization velocity of affect. Even dreams (Homburg’s,
the Amazons spring forth like lightning, “between” the two States, the
Pentheselea’s) are externalized, by a system of relays and plug-ins, extrin-
Greek and the Trojan. They sweep away everything in their path. Achilles
sic linkages belonging to the war machine. Broken rings. This element
is brought before his double, Penthesilea. And in his ambiguous struggle,
of exteriority—which dominates everything, which Kleist invents in lit-
Achilles is unable to prevent himself from marrying the war machine,
erature, which he is the first to invent—will give time a new rhythm: an
or from loving Penthesilea, and thus from betraying Agamemnon and
endless succession of catatonic episodes or fainting spells, and flashes or
Ulysses at the same time. Nevertheless, he already belongs enough to the
rushes. Catatonia is- “This affect is too strong for me,” and a flash is: “The
Greek State that Penthesilea, for her part, cannot enter the passional rela-
power of this affect sweeps me away,” so that the Self (Moi) is now noth-
tion of war with him without herself betraying the collective law of her
ing more than a character whose actions and emotions are desubjectified,
people, the law of the pack that prohibits “choosing” the enemy and en-
perhaps even to the point of death. Such is Kleist’s personal formula: a
tering into one-to-one relationships or binary distinctions.

succession of nights of madness and catatonic freezes in which no subjec-
Throughout his work, Kleist celebrates the war machine, setting it
tive interiority remains There is much of the East in Kleist: the Japanese
against the State apparatus in a struggle that is lost from the start. Doubt-
fighter, interminably still who then makes a move too quick to see. The
less Arminius heralds a Germanic war machine that breaks with the
Go player. Many things in modern art come from Kleist. Goethe and
imperial order of alliances and armies, and stands forever opposed to the
Hegel are old men next to Kleist. Could it be that it is at the moment the
Roman State. But the Prince of Homburg lives only in a dream and
war machine ceases to exist, conquered by the State, that it displays to
stands condemned for having reached victory in disobedience of the law
the utmost its irreducibility, that it scatters into thinking, loving, dy-
of the State. As for Kohlhaas, his war machine can no longer be any-
ing, or creating machines that have at their disposal vital or revolutionary
thing more than banditry. Is it the destiny of the war machine, when
powers capable of challenging the conquering State? Is the war machine
the State triumphs to be caught in this alternative: either to be nothing
already overtaken, condemned, appropriated as part of the same process
8
9
  
whereby it takes on new forms, undergoes a metamorphosis, affirms its
irreducibility and exteriority, and deploys that milieu of pure exteriority
that the occidental man of the State, or the occidental thinker, continually
reduces to something other than itself?

Problem I. Is there a war of warding off the formation of a
State apparatus (or its equivalents in a group)?

Proposition II. The exteriority of the war machine is also
attested to by ethnology (a tribute to the memory of Pierre
Clastres).

Primitive, segmentary societies have often been defined as societies
without a State, in other words, societies in which distinct organs of
power do not appear. But the conclusion has been that these societies did
not reach the degree of economic development, or the level of political dif-
ferentiation, that would make the formation of the State apparatus both
possible and inevitable: the implication is that primitive people “don’t
understand” so complex an apparatus. The prime interest in Pierre Clas-
tres’s theories is that they break with this evolutionist postulate. Not
only does he doubt that the State is the product of an ascribable economic
development, but he asks if it is not a potential concern of primitive soci-
eties to ward off or avert that monster they supposedly do not understand.

10
11
 
Warding off the formation of a State apparatus, making such a formation
acquiring stable power: the members of the band meet and undertake their
impossible, would be the objective of a certain number of primitive so-
theft activity in common, with collective sharing of the loot, but they
cial mechanisms, even if they are not consciously understood as such. To
disperse to eat or sleep separately; also, and especially, each member of
be sure, primitive societies have chiefs. But the State is not defined by
the band is paired off with one, two, or three other members, so if he
the existence of chiefs; it is defined by the perpetuation or conservation
has a disagreement with the leader, he will not leave alone but will take
of organs of power. The concern of the State is to conserve. Special in-
along his allies, whose combined departure will threaten to break up the
stitutions are thus necessary to enable a chief to become a man of State,
entire gang; finally, there is a diffuse age limit, and at about age fifteen a
but diffuse, collective mechanisms are just as necessary to prevent a chief
member is inevitably induced to quit the gang.These mechanisms cannot
from becoming one. Mechanisms for warding off, preventive mechanisms,
be understood without renouncing the evolutionist vision that sees bands
are a part of chieftainship and keep an apparatus distinct from the so-
or packs as a rudimentary, less organized, social form. Even in bands of
cial body from crystallizing. Clastres describes the situation of the chief,
animals, leadership is a complex mechanism that does not act to promote
who has no instituted weapon other than his prestige, no other means
the strongest but rather inhibits the installation of stable powers, in favor
of persuasion, no other rule than his sense of the group’s desires. The
of a fabric of immanent relations.14 One could just as easily compare the
chief is more like a leader or a star than a man of power and is always in
form “high-society life” to the form “sociability” among the most highly
danger of being disavowed, abandoned by his people. But Clastres goes
evolved men and women: high-society groups are similar to gangs and
further, identifying war in primitive societies as the surest mechanism
operate by the diffusion of prestige rather than by reference to centers of
directed against the formation of the State: war maintains the dispersal
power, as in social groupings (Proust clearly showed this noncorrespon-
and segmentarity of groups, and the warrior himself is caught in a process
dence of high- society values and social values). Eugene Sue, a man of high
of accumulating exploits leading him to solitude and a prestigious but
society and a dandy, whom legitimists reproached for frequenting the Or-
powerless death. Clastres can thus invoke natural Law while reversing
leans family used to say: Tm not on the side of the family, I side with
its principal proposition: just as Hobbes saw clearly that the State was
the pack.” Packs, bands, are groups of the rhizome type, as opposed to
against war, so war is against the State, and makes it impossible. It
the arborescent type that centers around organs of power. That is why
should not be concluded that war is a state of nature, but rather that it is
bands in general, even those engaged in banditry or high-society life, are
the mode of a social state that wards off and prevents the State. Primitive
metamorphoses of a war machine formally distinct from all State appa-
war does not produce the State any more than it derives from it. And it is
ratuses or their equivalents, which are instead what structure centralized
no better explained by exchange than by the State: far from deriving from
societies. We certainly would not say that discipline is what defines a
exchange, even as a sanction for its failure, war is what limits exchanges,
war machine: discipline is the characteristic required of armies after the
maintains them in the framework of “alliances”; it is what prevents them
State has appropriated them. The war machine answers to other rules. We
from becoming a State factor, from fusing groups.

are not saying that they are better, of course, only that they animate a
The importance of this thesis is first of all to draw attention to col-
fundamental indiscipline of the warrior! A questioning of hierarchy, per-
lective mechanisms of inhibition. These mechanisms may be subtle, and
petual blackmail by abandonment or betrayal, and a very volatile sense
function as micromechanisms. This is easily seen in certain band or pack
of honor, all of which, once again, it impedes the formation of the State.

phenomena. For example, in the case of gangs of street children in Bogota,
But why does this argument fail to convince us entirely? We fol ow
Jacques Meunier cites three ways in which the leader is prevented from
Clastres when he demonstrates that the State is explained neither by
12
13
 
a development of productive forces nor by a differentiation of political
rises up in a single stroke, fully formed; on the other, the counter-State
forces. It is the State, on the contrary, that makes possible the undertak-
societies use very specific mechanisms to ward it off, to prevent it from
ing of large-scale projects, the constitution of surpluses, and the organi-
arising. We believe that these two propositions are valid but that their
zation of the corresponding public functions. The State is what makes the
interlinkage is flawed. There is an old scenario: “from clans to empires,” or
distinction between governors and governed possible. We do not see how
“from bands to kingdoms.” But nothing says that this constitutes an evo-
the State can be explained by what it presupposes, even with recourse to
lution, since bands and clans are no less organized than empire-kingdoms.

dialectics. The State seems to rise up in a single stroke, in an imperial form,
We will never leave the evolution hypothesis behind by creating a break
and does not depend on progressive factors. Its on-the-spot emergence is
between the two terms, that is, by endowing bands with self-sufficiency
like a stroke of genius, the birth of Athena. We also follow Clastres when
and the State with an emergence all the more miraculous and monstrous.

he shows that the war machine is directed against the State, either against
We are compelled to say that there has always been a State, quite per-
potential States whose formation it wards off in advance, or against actual
fect quite complete. The more discoveries archaeologists make, the more
States whose destruction it purposes. No doubt the war machine is real-
empires they uncover. The hypothesis of the Urstaat seems to be veri-
ized more completely in the “barbaric” assemblages of nomadic warriors
fied- The State clearly dates back to the most remote ages of humanity.” It
than in the “savage” assemblages of primitive societies. In any case, it is
is hard to imagine primitive societies that would not have been in con-
out of the ‘ question that the State could be the result of a war in which
tact with imperial States, at the periphery or in poorly controlled areas.

the conquerors imposed, by the very fact of their victory, a new law on
But of greater importance is the inverse hypothesis: that the State itself
the vanquished, because the organization of the war machine is directed
has always been m a relation with an outside and is inconceivable inde-
against the State- form, actual or virtual. The State is no better accounted
pendent of that relationship. The law of the State is not the law of all or
for as a result of war than by a progression of economic or political forces.

Nothing (State societies or counter-State societies) but that of interior
This is where Clastres locates the break: between “primitive” counter-
and exterior. The State is sovereignty. But sovereignty only reigns over
State societies and “monstrous” State societies whose formation it is no
what it is capable of internalizing, of appropriating locally. Not only is
longer possible to explain. Clastres is fascinated by the problem of “vol-
there no universal State but the outside of States cannot be reduced to
untary servitude,” in the manner of La Boetie: In what way did people
“foreign policy,” that is to a set of relations among States. The outside
want or desire servitude, which most certainly did not come to them as
appears simultaneously in two directions: huge worldwide machines
the outcome of an involuntary and unfortunate war? They did, after all,
branched out over the entire ecumenon at a given moment, which enjoy
have counter-State mechanisms at their disposal: So how and why the
a large measure of autonomy in relation to the States (for example, com-
State? Why did the State triumph? The more deeply Clastres delved into
mercial organization of the “multinational” type, or industrial complexes,
the problem, the more he seemed to deprive himself of the means of re-
or even religious formations like Christianity, Islam, certain prophetic
solving it. He tended to make primitive societies hypostases, self-suffi-
or messianic movements, etc ) but also the local mechanisms of bands,
cient entities (he insisted heavily on this point). He made their formal
margins, minorities, which continue to affirm the rights of segmentary
exteriority into a real independence. Thus he remained an evolutionist,
societies in opposition to the organs of State power. The modern world
and posited a state of nature. Only this state of nature was, according to
can provide us today with particularly well developed images of these two
him, a fully social reality instead of a pure concept, and the evolution was
directions: worldwide ecumenical machines, but also a neoprimitivism, a
a sudden mutation instead of a development. For on the one hand, the State
new tribal society as described by Marshall McLuhan. These directions
14
15
  
are equally present in all social fields, in all periods. It even happens that
they partially merge. For example, a commercial organization is also a
band of pillage, or piracy for part of its course and in many of its activi-
ties; or it is in bands that a religious formation begins to operate. What
becomes clear is that bands, no less than worldwide organizations, im-
ply a form irreducible to the State and that this form of exteriority
necessarily presents itself as a diffuse and polymorphous war machine.

It is a nomas very different from the “law” The State-form, as a form of
inferiority, has a tendency to reproduce itself, remaining identical to itself
across its variations and easily recognizable within the limits of its poles,
always seeking public recognition (there is no masked State). But the
war machine’s form of exteriority is such that it exists only in its own
metamorphoses; it exists in an industrial innovation as well as in a tech-
nological invention, in a commercial circuit as well as in a religious
creation, in all flows and currents that only secondarily allow themselves
Proposition III. The exteriority of the war machine is also
to be appropriated by the State. It is in terms not of independence,
attested to by epistemology which intimates the existence
but of coexistence and competition in a perpetual Held of interac-
and perpetuation of a “nomad” or “minor science.”
tion, that we must conceive of exteriority and inferiority, war machines
of metamorphosis and State apparatuses of identity, bands and king-
doms, megamachines and empires. The same field circumscribes its
interiority in States, but describes its exteriority in what escapes States
or stands against States.

There is a kind of science, or treatment of science, that seems very
difficult to classify, whose history is even difficult to follow. What
we are referring to are not “technologies” in the usual sense of the
term. But neither are they “sciences” in the royal or legal sense estab-
lished by history. According to a recent book by Michel Serres, both
the atomic physics of Democritus and Lucretius and the geometry of
Archimedes are marked by it. The characteristics of this kind of ec-
centric science would seem to be the following;
1. First of all, it uses a hydraulic model, rather than being a theory
of solids treating fluids as a special case; ancient atomism is inseparable
from flows, and flux is reality itself, or consistency.

2. The model in question is one of becoming and heterogeneity, as
opposed to the stable, the eternal, the identical, the constant. It is a
16
17
 
“paradox” to make becoming itself a model, and no longer a second-
the straight line of a rectification. Whereas the theorem belongs to the
ary characteristic, a copy; in the Timaeus, Plato raises this possibility,
rational order, the problem is affective and is inseparable from the meta-
but only in order to exclude it and conjure it away in the name of royal
morphoses, generations, and creations within science itself. Despite what
science. By contrast, in atomism, just such a model of heterogeneity,
Gabriel Marcel may say, the problem is not an “obstacle”; it is the surpass-
and of passage or becoming in the heterogeneous, is furnished by the
ing of the obstacle, a projection, in other words, a war machine. All of this
famed declination of the atom. The clinamen, as the minimum angle,
movement is what royal science is striving to limit when it reduces as
has meaning only between a straight line and a curve, the curve and its
much as possible the range of the “problem-element” and subordinates it
tangent, and constitutes the original curvature of the movement of
to the “theorem-element.”
the atom. The clinamen is the smallest angle by which an atom devi-
This Archimedean science, or this conception of science, is bound up in
ates from a straight path. It is a passage to the limit, an exhaustion,
an essential way with the war machine: iheproblemataaie the war ma-
a paradoxical “exhaustive” model. The same applies to Archimedean
chine itself and are inseparable from inclined planes, passages to the limit,
geometry, in which the straight line, defined as “the shortest path be-
vortices, and projections. It would seem that the war machine is projected
tween two points,” is just a way of defining the length of a curve in a
into an abstract knowledge formally different from the one that doubles
predifferential calculus.

the State apparatus. It would seem that a whole nomad science develops
3. One no longer goes from the straight line to its parallels, in a la-
eccentrically, one that is very different from the royal or imperial sci-
mellar or laminar flow,* but from a curvilinear declination to the for-
ences. Furthermore, this nomad science is continually “barred,” inhibited
mation of spirals and vortices on an inclined plane: the greatest slope for
or banned by the demands and conditions of State science. Archimedes,
the smallest angle. From turha to turbo: in other words, from bands or
vanquished by the Roman State, becomes a symbol.The fact is that the
packs of atoms to the great vortical organizations. The model is a vor-
two kinds of science have different modes of formalization, and State sci-
tical one; it operates in an open space throughout which things-flows
ence continually imposes its form of sovereignty on the inventions of
are distributed, rather than plotting out a closed space for linear and
nomad science. State science retains of nomad science only what it can ap-
solid things. It is the difference between a smooth (vectorial, projec-
propriate; it turns the rest into a set of strictly limited formulas without
tive, or topological) space and a striated (metric) space: in the first case
any real scientific status, or else simply represses and bans it. It is as if the
“space is occupied without being counted,” and in the second case “space
“savants” of nomad science were caught between a rock and a hard place,
is counted in order to be occupied.”
between the war machine that nourishes and inspires them and the State
4. Finally, the model is problematic, rather than theorematic: figures
that imposes upon them an order of reasons. The figure of the engineer
are considered only from the viewpoint of the affections that befall
(in particular the military engineer), with all its ambivalence, is illustra-
them- sections, ablations, adjunctions, projections. One does not go by
tive of this situation. Most significant are perhaps borderline phenomena
specific differences from a genus to its species, or by deduction from a sta-
in which nomad science exerts pressure on State science, and, conversely,
ble essence to the properties deriving from it, but rather from a problem
State science appropriates and transforms the elements of nomad science.

to the accidents that condition and resolve it. This involves all kinds of
This is true of the art of encampments, “castrametation,” which has always
deformations, transmutations, passages to the limit, operations in which
mobilized projections and inclined planes: the State does not appropriate
each figure designates an “event” much more than an essence; the square
this dimension of the war machine without submitting it to civil and
no longer exists independently of a quadrature, the cube of a cubature
metric rules that strictly limit, control, localize nomad science, and with-
18
19
 
out keeping it from having repercussions throughout the social field (in
rhythm, on the origin of that notion, do not seem entirely convincing.

this respect, Vauban is like a repeat of Archimedes, and suffers an analo-
For we are told that rhythm has nothing to do with the movement of
gous defeat). It is true of descriptive and projective geometry, which royal
waves but rather that it designates “form” in general, and more specifically
science would like to turn into a mere practical dependency of analytic, or
the form of a “measured, cadenced” movement.However, rhythm is never
so-called higher, geometry (thus the ambiguous situation of Monge and
the same as measure. And though the atomist Democritus is one of the
Poncelet as “savants”). It is also true of differential calculus. For a long
authors who speak of rhythm in the sense of form, it should be borne in
time, it had only parascientific status and was labeled a “Gothic hypoth-
mind that he does so under very precise conditions of fluctuation and
esis”; royal science only accorded it the value of a convenient convention
that the forms made by atoms are primarily large, nonmetric aggregates,
or a well-founded fiction. The great State mathematicians did their best
smooth spaces such as the air, the sea, or even the earth (magnae res).

to improve its status, but precisely on the condition that all the dynamic,
There is indeed such a thing as measured, cadenced rhythm, relating to the
nomadic notions—such as becoming, ‘ heterogeneity, infinitesimal, pas-
coursing of a river between its banks or to the form of a striated space;
sage to the limit, continuous variation —be eliminated and civil, static,
but there is also a rhythm without measure, which relates to the upswell
and ordinal rules be imposed upon it (Carnot’s ambiguous position in this
of a flow, in other words, to the manner in which a fluid occupies a
respect). Finally, it is true of the hydraulic model, for it is certain that
smooth space.

the State itself needs a hydraulic science (there is no going back on Witt-
This opposition, or rather this tension-limit between the two kinds of
fogel’s theses on the importance of large-scale waterworks for an empire).

science—nomad, war machine science and royal, State science—reappears
But it needs it in a very different form, because the State needs to subor-
at different moments, on different levels. The work of Anne Querrien
dinate hydraulic force to conduits, pipes, embankments, which prevent
enables us to identify two of these moments; one is the construction
turbulence, which constrain movement to go from one point to another,
of Gothic cathedrals in the twelfth century, the other the construction
and space itself to be striated and measured, which makes the fluid depend
of bridges in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.* Gothic archi-
on the solid, and flows proceed by parallel, laminar layers. The hydraulic
tecture is indeed inseparable from a will to build churches longer and
model of nomad science and the war machine, on the other hand, consists
taller than the Romanesque churches. Ever farther, ever higher ... But
in being distributed by turbulence across a smooth space, in producing a
this difference is not simply quantitative; it marks a qualitative change:
movement that holds space and simultaneously affects all of its points, in-
the static relation, form-matter, tends to fade into the background in fa-
stead of being held by space in a local movement from one specified point
vor of a dynamic relation, material-forces. It is the cutting of the stone
to another. Democritus, Menaechmus, Archimedes, Vauban, Desargues,
that turns it into material capable of holding and coordinating forces of
Bernoulli, Monge, Carnot, Poncelet, Perronet, etc.: in each case a mono-
thrust, and of constructing ever higher and longer vaults. The vault is
graph would be necessary to take into account the special situation of
no longer a form but the line of continuous variation of the stones. It
these savants whom State science used only after restraining or disciplin-
is as if Gothic conquered a smooth space, while Romanesque remained
ing them, after repressing their social or political conceptions.

partially within a striated space (in which the vault depends on the jux-
The sea as a smooth space is a specific problem of the war machine. As
taposition of parallel pillars). But stone cutting is inseparable from, on
Virilio shows, it is at sea that the problem of the fleet in being is posed,
the one hand, a plane of projection at ground level, which functions as a
in other words, the task of occupying an open space with a vortical move-
plane limit, and, on the other hand, a series of successive approximations
ment that can rise up at any point. In this respect, the recent studies on
(squaring), or placings-in-variation of voluminous stones. Of course, one
20
21
 
appealed to the theorematic science of Euclid in order to find a founda-
sponsibility of determining its locations and objects, governing the work
tion for the enterprise: mathematical figures and equations were thought
sites, and regulating construction), but the secular State, in its royal form,
to be the intelligible form capable of organizing surfaces and volumes.

turned against the Templars themselves, banning the guilds for a number
But according to the legend, Bernard de Clairvaux quickly abandoned
of reasons, at least one of which was the prohibition of this operative or
the effort as too “difficult,” appealing to the specificity of an operative,
minor geometry.

Archimedean geometry, a projective and descriptive geometry defined
Is Anne Querrien right to find yet another echo of the same story
as a minor science, more a mathegraphy than a matheology. His jour-
in the case of bridges in the eighteenth century? Doubtless, the condi-
neyman, the monk-mason Garin de Troyes, speaks of an operative logic
tions were very different, for the division of labor according to State
of movement enabling the “initiate” to draw, then hew the volumes
norms was by then an accomplished fact. But the fact remains that in
“in penetration in space,” to make it so that “the cutting line propels
the government agency in charge of bridges and roadways, roadways
the equation” (le trait pousse le chiffre). One does not represent, one
were under a well- centralized administration while bridges were still
engenders and traverses. This science is characterized less by the absence
the object of active, dynamic, and collective experimentation. Trudaine
of equations than by the very different role they play: instead of be-
organized unusual, open “general assemblies” in his home. Perronet took
ing good forms absolutely that organize matter, they are “generated” as
as his inspiration a supple model originating in the Orient: The bridge
“forces of thrust” (poussees) by the material, in a qualitative calculus
should not choke or obstruct the river. To the heaviness of the bridge, to
of the optimum. This whole current of Archimedean geometry was taken
the striated space of thick and regular piles, he opposed a thinning and
to its highest expression, but was also brought to a temporary standstill,
discontinuity of the piles, surbase, and vault, a lightness and continuous
by the remarkable seventeenth-century mathematician Desargues. Like
variation of the whole. But his attempt soon ran up against principled
most of his kind, Desargues wrote little; he nevertheless exerted a great
opposition; the State, in naming Perronet director of the school, followed
influence through his actions and left outlines, rough drafts, and proj-
a frequently used procedure that inhibited experimentation more than
ects, all centered on problem-events: “Lamentations,” “draft project for
crowning its achievements. The whole history of the Ecole des Ponts et
the cutting of stones,” “draft project for grappling with the events of the
Chaussees (School of Bridges and Roadways) illustrates how this old,
encounters of a cone and a plane,. . . Desargues, however, was condemned
plebeian “corps” was subordinated to the Ecole des Mines, the Ecole
by the parlement of Paris, opposed by the king’s secretary; his practices
des Travaux Publics, and the Ecole Polytechnique, at the same time as
of perspective were banned.211 Royal, or State, science only tolerates and
its activities were increasingly normalized.We thus come to the ques-
appropriates stone cutting by means of templates (the opposite of squar-
tion, What is a collective body Undoubtedly, the great collective bodies
ing), under conditions that restore the primacy of the fixed model of
of a State are differentiated and hierarchical organisms that on the one
form, mathematical figures, and measurement. Royal science only toler-
hand enjoy a monopoly over a power or function and on the other hand
ates and appropriates perspective if it is static, subjected to a central black
send out local representatives. They have a special relation to families,
hole divesting it of its heuristic and ambulatory capacities. But the ad-
because they link the family model to the State model at both ends and
venture, or event, of Desargues is the same one that had already occurred
regard themselves as “great families” of functionaries, clerks, intendants,
among the Gothic “journeymen” on a collective level. For not only did
or farmers. Yet it seems that in many of these collective bodies there is
the Church, in its imperial form, feel the need to strictly control the
something else at work that does not fit into this schema. It is not just
movement of this nomad science (it entrusted the Templars with the re-
their obstinate defense of their privileges. It is also their aptitude—even
22
23
 
caricatural or seriously deformed—to constitute themselves as a war ma-
an experimental surge. A confused situation: each time it occurs, it is
chine, following other models, another dynamism, a nomadic ambition,
necessary to analyze tendencies and poles, the nature of the movements.

over against the State. As an example, there is the very old problem of the
All of a sudden, it is as if the collective body of the notary publics were
lobby, , a group with fluid contours, whose position is very ambiguous
advancing like Arabs or Indians, then regrouping and reorganizing: a
in relation to the State it wishes to “influence” and the war machine it
comic opera where you never know what is going to happen next (even
wishes to promote, to whatever ends.

the cry “The police are with us!” is sometimes heard).

A body (corps) is not reducible to an organism, any more than esprit
Husserl speaks of a protogeometry that addresses vague, in other
de corps is reducible to the soul of an organism. Spirit is not better, but it is
words, vagabond or nomadic, morphological essences. These essences are
volatile, whereas the soul is weighted, a center of gravity. Must we invoke
distinct from sensible things, as well as from ideal, royal, or imperial es-
a military origin of the collective body and esprit de corps? “Military”
sences. Protogeometry, the science dealing with them, is itself vague, in
is not the part that counts, but rather the distant nomadic origin. Ian
the etymological sense of “vagabond”: it is neither inexact like sensible
Khaldun defines the nomad war machine by: families or lineages plus
things nor exact like ideal essences, but anexactyet rigorous (“essentially
esprit de corps. The war machine entertains a relation to families that is
and not accidentally inexact”). The circle is an organic, ideal, fixed essence,
very different from its relation to the State. In the war machine, the fam-
but roundness is a vague and fluent essence, distinct both from the circle
ily is a band vector instead of a fundamental cell; a genealogy is transferred
and things that are round (a vase, a wheel, the sun). A theorematic figure
from one family to another according to the aptitude of a given family
is a fixed essence, but its transformations, distortions, ablations, and aug-
at a given time to realize the maximum of “agnatic solidarity.” Here, it is
mentations, all of its variations, form problematic figures that are vague
not the public eminence of a family that determines its place in a State
yet rigorous, “lens-shaped,” “umbelliform,” or “indented.” It could be
organism but the reverse; it is the secret power (puissance), or strength of
said that vague essences extract from things a determination that is more
solidarity, and the corresponding genealogical mobility that determine
than thinghood (choseite), which is that of corporeality (corporate),
its eminence in a war body.31 This has to do neither with the monopoly
and which perhaps even implies an esprit de corps. But why does Husserl
of an organic power (pouvoir) nor with local representation, but is re-
see this as a protogeometry, a kind of halfway point and not a pure sci-
lated to the potential (puissance) of a vortical body in a nomad space.

ence? Why does he make pure essences dependent upon a passage to the
Of course, the great bodies of a modern State can hardly be thought of
limit, when any passage to the limit belongs as such to the vague? What
as Arab tribes. What we wish to say, rather, is that collective bodies al-
we have, rather, are two formally different conceptions of science, and, on-
ways have fringes or minorities that reconstitute equivalents of the war
tologically, a single field of interaction in which royal science continually
machine—in sometimes quite unforeseen forms—in specific assemblages
appropriates the contents of vague or nomad science while nomad science
such as building bridges or cathedrals or rendering judgments or mak-
continually cuts the contents of royal science loose. At the limit, all that
ing music or instituting a science, a technology . . . A collective body
counts is the constantly shifting borderline. In Husserl (and also in Kant,
of captains asserts its demands through the organization of the officers
though in the opposite direction: roundness as the “schema” of the circle),
and the organism of the superior officers. There are always periods when
we find a very accurate appreciation of the irreducibility of nomad sci-
the State as organism has problems with its own collective bodies, when
ence, but simultaneously the concern of a man of the State, or one who
these bodies, claiming certain privileges, are forced in spite of themselves to
sides with the State, to maintain a legislative and constituent primacy
open onto something that exceeds them, a short revolutionary instant,
for royal science. Whenever this primacy is taken for granted, nomad sci-
24
25
 
ence is portrayed as a prescientific or parascientific or subscientific agency.

cutting by squaring is opposed to stone cutting using templates, which
And most important, it becomes impossible to understand the relations
implies the erection of a model for reproduction. It can be said not only
between science and technology, science and practice, because nomad sci-
that there is no longer a need for skilled or qualified labor, but also that
ence is not a simple technology or practice, but a scientific field in which
there is a need for unskilled or unqualified labor, for a dequalification
the problem of these relations is brought out and resolved in an entirely
of labor. The State does not give power (pouvoir) to the intellectuals or
different way than from the point of view of royal science. The State is
conceptual innovators; on the contrary, it makes them a strictly depen-
perpetually producing and reproducing ideal circles, but a war machine is
dent organ with an autonomy that is only imagined yet is sufficient to
necessary to make something round. Thus the specific characteristics of
divest those whose job it becomes simply to reproduce or implement of
nomad science are what need to be determined in order to understand
all of their power (puissance). This does not shield the State from more
both the repression it encounters and the interaction “containing” it.

trouble, this time with the body of intellectuals it itself engendered, but
Nomad science does not have the same relation to work as royal sci-
which asserts new nomadic and political claims. In any case, if the State
ence. Not that the division of labor in nomad science is any less thor-
always finds it necessary to repress the nomad and minor sciences, if it
ough; it is different. We know of the problems States have always had
opposes vague essences and the operative geometry of the trait, it does
with journeymen’s associations, or compagnonnages, the nomadic or
so not because the content of these sciences is inexact or imperfect, or
itinerant bodies of the type formed by masons, carpenters, smiths, etc.

because of their magic or initiatory character, but because they imply a
Settling, seden-tarizing labor power, regulating the movement of the
division of labor opposed to the norms of the State. The difference is not
flow of labor, assigning it channels and conduits, forming corporations
extrinsic: the way in which a science, or a conception of science, partici-
in the sense of organisms, and, for the rest, relying on forced manpower
pates in the organization of the social field, and in particular induces a
recruited on the spot (corvee) or among indigents (charity workshops)—
division of labor, is part of that science itself. Royal science is inseparable
this has always been one of the principal affairs of the State, which un-
from a “hylomorphic” model implying both a form that organizes mat-
dertook to conquer both a band vagabondage and a body nomadism.

ter and a matter prepared for the form; it has often been shown that this
Let us return to the example of Gothic architecture for a reminder of
schema derives less from technology or life than from a society divided
how extensively the journeymen traveled, building cathedrals near and
into governors and governed, and later, intellectuals and manual laborers.

far, scattering construction sites across the land, drawing on an active
What characterizes it is that all matter is assigned to content, while all
and passive power (mobility and the strike) that was far from convenient
form passes into expression. It seems that nomad science is more imme-
for the State. The State’s response was to take over management of the
diately in tune with the connection between content and expression in
construction sites, merging all the divisions of labor in the supreme dis-
themselves, each of these two terms encompassing both form and matter.

tinction between the intellectual and the manual, the theoretical and the
Thus matter, in nomad science, is never prepared and therefore homog-
practical, modeled upon the difference between “governors” and “gov-
enized matter, but is essentially laden with singularities (which consti-
erned.” In the nomad sciences, as in the royal sciences, we find the exis-
tute a form of content). And neither is expression formal; it is inseparable
tence of a “plane,” but not at all in the same way. The ground-level plane
from pertinent traits (which constitute a matterof expression). This is an
of the Gothic journeyman is opposed to the metric plane of the archi-
entirely different schema, as we shall see. We can get a preliminary idea of
tect, which is on paper and off site. The plane of consistency or composi-
this situation by recalling the most general characteristic of nomad art, in
tion is opposed to another plane, that of organization or formation. Stone
which a dynamic connection between support and ornament replaces the
26
27
 
matter-form dialectic. From the point of view of nomad science, which
of its directions, so as to render it homogeneous. The vertical distance
presents itself as an art as much as a technique, the division of labor fully
between two points provided the mode of comparison for the horizontal
exists, but it does not employ the form-matter duality (even in the case of
distance between two other points. Universal attraction became the law
biunivocal correspondences). Rather, it follows the connections between
of all laws, in that it set the rule for the biunivocal correspondence be-
singularities of matter and traits of expression, and lodges on the level
tween two bodies; and each time science discovered a new field, it sought
of these connections, whether they be natural or forced. This is another
to formalize it in the same mode as the field of gravity. Even chemistry
organization of work and of the social field through work.

became a royal science only by virtue of a whole theoretical elaboration
It is instructive to contrast two models of science, after the manner
of the notion of weight. Euclidean space is founded on the famous parallel
of Plato in the Timaeus. One could be called Compars and the other
postulate, but the parallels in question are in the first place gravitational
Dispars. The compars is the legal or legalist model employed by royal
parallels, and correspond to the forces exerted by gravity on all the ele-
science. The search for laws consists in extracting constants, even if those
ments of a body presumed to fill that space. It is the point of application
constants are only relations between variables (equations). An invari-
of the resultant of all of these parallel forces that remains invariable when
able form for variables, a variable matter of the invariant: such is the
their common direction is changed or the body is rotated (the center of
foundation of the hylomorphic schema. But for the dispars as an ele-
gravity). In short, it seems that the force of gravity lies at the basis of a
ment of nomad science the relevant distinction is material-forces rather
laminar, striated, homogeneous, and centered space; it forms the foun-
than matter-form. Here, it is not exactly a question of extracting con-
dation for those multiplicities termed metric, or arborescent, whose
stants from variables but of placing the variables themselves in a state of
dimensions are independent of the situation and are expressed with the
continuous variation. If there are still equations, they are adequations,
aid of units and points (movements from one point to another). It was
inequations, differential equations irreducible to the algebraic form and
not some metaphysical concern, but an effectively scientific one, that fre-
inseparable from a sensible intuition of variation. They seize or deter-
quently led scientists in the nineteenth century to ask if all forces were not
mine singularities in the matter, instead of constituting a general form.

reducible to gravity, or rather to the form of attraction that gives gravity
They effect individuations through events, not through the “object” as
a universal value (a constant relation for all variables) and biunivocal
a compound of matter and form; vague essences are nothing other than
scope (two bodies at a time, and no more). It is the form of interiority of
haecceities. In all these respects, there is an opposition between the logos
all science. The nomos, or the dispars, is altogether different. But this
and the nomas, the law and the nomas, prompting the comment that
is not to say that the other forces refute gravity or contradict attraction.

the law still “savors of morality.”This does not mean, however, that the
Although it is true that they do not go against them, they do not result
legal model knows nothing of forces, the play of forces. That it does is
from them either; they do not depend on them but testify to events that
evident in the homogeneous space corresponding to the compars. Homo-
are always supplementary or of “variable affects” Each time a new field
geneous space is in no way a smooth space; on the contrary, it is the form
opened up in science—under conditions making this a far more impor-
of striated space. The space of pillars. It is striated by the fall of bodies,
tant notion than that of form or object—it proved irreducible to the field
the verticals of gravity, the distribution of matter into parallel layers,
of attraction and the model of the gravitational forces, although not con-
the lamellar and laminar movement of flows. These parallel verticals
tradictory to them. It affirmed a “more” or an excess, and lodged itself in
have formed an independent dimension capable of spreading everywhere,
that excess, that deviation. When chemistry took a decisive step forward,
of formalizing all the other dimensions, of striating all of space in all
it was always by adding to the force of weight bonds of another type
28
29
 
(for example, electric) that transformed the nature of chemical equa-
itself. In this space, matter-flow can no longer be cut into parallel layers,
tions. 3* But it will be noted that the simplest considerations of veloc-
and movement no longer allows itself to be hemmed into biunivocal
ity immediately introduce the difference between vertical descent and
relations between points. In this sense, the role of the qualitative op-
curvilinear motion, or more generally between the straight line and the
position gravity-celerity, heavy-light, slow-rapid is not that of a quan-
curve, in the differential form of the clinamen, or the smallest devia-
tifiable scientific determination but of a condition that is coextensive
tion, the minimum excess. Smooth space is precisely the space of the
to science and that regulates both the separation and the mixing of the
smallest deviation: therefore it has no homogeneity, except between
two models, their possible interpenetration, the domination of one by
infinitely proximate points, and the linking of proximities is effected
the other, their alternative. And the best formulation, that of Michel
independently of any determined path. It is a space of contact, of small
Serres, is indeed couched in terms of an alternative, whatever mixes or
tactile or manual actions of contact, rather than a visual space like Eu-
compositions there may be: “Physics is reducible to two sciences, a general
clid’s striated space. Smooth space is a field without conduits or chan-
theory of routes and paths, and a global theory of waves.”
nels. A field, a heterogeneous smooth space, is wedded to a very particu-
A distinction must be made between two types of science, or scientific-
lar type of multiplicity: nonmetric, acentered, rhizomatic multiplicities
procedures: one consists in “reproducing,” the other in “following “ The
that occupy space without “counting” it and can “be explored only by
first involves reproduction, iteration and reiteration; the other, involving
legwork.” They do not meet the visual condition of being observable
itineration, is the sum of the itinerant, ambulant sciences. Itineration
from a point in space external to them; an example of this is the system
is too readily reduced to a modality of technology, or of the application
of sounds, or even of colors, as opposed to Euclidean space.

and verification of science. But this is not the case: following is no, at
When we oppose speed and slowness, the quick and the weighty,
all the same thing as reproducing, and one never follows in order to
Celeritas and Gravitas, this must not be seen as a quantitative opposi-
reproduce The ideal of reproduction, deduction, or induction is part of
tion, or as a mythological structure (although Dumézil has established
royal science at all times and in all places, and treats differences of time
the mythological importance of this opposition, precisely in relation
and place as so many variables, the constant form of which is extracted
to the State apparatus and its natural “gravity”). The opposition is
precisely by the law for the same phenomena to recur in a gravitational
both qualitative and scientific, in that speed is not merely an abstract
and striated space it is sufficient for the same conditions to obtain, or for
characteristic of movement in general but is incarnated in a moving
the same constant relation to hold between the differing conditions and
body that deviates, however slightly, from its line of descent or grav-
the variable phenomena Reproducing implies the permanence of a fixed
ity. Slow and rapid are not quantitative degrees of movement but
point of view that is external to what is reproduced: watching the flow
rather two types of qualified movement\ whatever the speed of the
from the bank. But following is something different from the ideal of
former or the tardiness of the latter. Strictly speaking, it cannot be said
reproduction. Not better, just different. One is obliged to follow when
that a body that is dropped has a speed, however fast it falls; rather it has
one is in search of the “singularities” of a matter, or rather of a material,
an infinitely decreasing slowness in accordance with the law of falling
and not out to discover a form- when one escapes the force of gravity to
bodies. Laminar movement that striates space, that goes from one point
enter a field of celerity; when one ceases to contemplate the course of a
to another, is weighty; but rapidity, celerity, applies only to movement
laminar flow in a determinate direction to be carried away by a vortical
that deviates to the minimum extent and thereafter assumes a vorti-
now; when one engages in a continuous variation of variables, instead of
cal motion, occupying a smooth space, actually drawing smooth space
extracting constants from them, etc. And the meaning of Earth com-
30
31
 
pletely changes: with the legal model, one is constantly reterritorializa-
gains its curvilinear and vortical motion that excludes any parallelism
ing around a point of view, on a domain, according to a set of constant
between vectors, and smooth space reconquers the properties of contact
relations; but with the ambulant model, the process of deterritorializa-
that prevent it from remaining homogeneous and striated. There is al-
tion constitutes and extends the territory itself “Go first to your old plant
ways a current preventing the ambulant or itinerant sciences from be-
and watch carefully the watercourse made by the rain By now the rain
ing completely internalized in the reproductive royal sciences. There is
must have carried the seeds faraway. Watch the crevices made by the run-
a type of ambulant scientist whom State scientists are forever fighting
off, and from them determine the direction of the now. Then find the
or integrating or allying with, even going so far as to propose a minor
plant that is growing at the farthest point from our plant. All the devils
position for them within the legal system of science and technology.

weed plants that are growing in between are yours. Later you can extend
It is not that the ambulant sciences are more saturated with irrational
the size of your territory.” There are itinerant, ambulant sciences that
procedures, with mystery and magic. They only get that way when they
consist in flowing a flow in a vectorial field across which singulari-
fall into abeyance. And the royal sciences, for their part, also surround
ties are scattered like so many “accidents” (problems). For example
themselves with much priestliness and magic. Rather, what becomes
why is primitive metallurgy necessarily an ambulant science that con-
apparent in the rivalry between the two models is that the ambulant or
fers upon smiths a quasi-nomadic status? It could be objected that in
nomad sciences do not destine science to take on an autonomous power,
these examples it is still a question of going from one point to another
or even to have an autonomous development. They do not have the
(even if they are singular points) through the intermediary of channels,
means for that because they subordinate all their operations to the sen-
and that it is still possible to cut the now into layers. But this is only
sible conditions of intuition and construction—following the flow of
true to the extent that ambulant procedures and processes are necessar-
matter, drawing and linking up smooth space. Everything is situated
ily tied to a striated space—always formalized by royal science—which
in an objective zone of fluctuation that is coextensive with reality itself.

deprives them of their model, submits them to its own model, and al-
However refined or rigorous, “approximate knowledge” is still depen-
lows them to exist only in the capacity of “technologies” or “applied
dent upon sensitive and sensible evaluations that pose more problems
science.” As a general rule, a smooth space, a vectorial field, a non-
than they solve: problematics is still its only mode. In contrast, what is
metric multiplicity are always translatable, and necessarily translated,
proper to royal science, to its theorematic or axiomatic power, is to iso-
into a “compars”: a fundamental operation by which one repeatedly
late all operations from the conditions of intuition, making them true
overlays upon each point of smooth space a tangent Euclidean space
intrinsic concepts, or “categories.” That is precisely why deterritorializa-
endowed with a sufficient number of dimensions, by which one re-
tion, in this kind of science, implies a reterritorialization in the con-
introduces parallelism between two vectors, treating multiplicity as
ceptual apparatus. Without this categorical, apodictic apparatus, the
though it were immersed in this homogeneous and striated space of
differential operations would be constrained to follow the evolution
reproduction, instead of continuing to follow it in an “exploration
of a phenomenon; what is more, since the experimentation would be
by leg- work.”39 This is the triumph of the logos or the law over the
open-air, and the construction at ground level, the coordinates permit-
nomas. But the complexity of the operation testifies to the existence
ting them to be erected as stable models would never become available.

of resistances it must overcome. Whenever ambulant procedure and
Certain of these requirements are translated in terms of “safety”: the two
process are returned to their own model, the points regain their posi-
cathedrals at Orleans and Beauvais collapsed at the end of the twelfth
tion as singularities that exclude all biunivocal relations, the flow re-
century, and control calculations are difficult to effect for the construc-
32
33
  
tions of ambulant science. Although safety is a fundamental element in
the theoretical norms of the State, and of the political ideal, there is also
something else at issue as well. Due to all their procedures, the ambulant
sciences quickly overstep the possibility of calculation: they inhabit that
“more” that exceeds the space of reproduction and soon run into prob-
lems that are insurmountable from that point of view; they eventually
resolve those problems by means of a real-life operation. The solutions
are supposed to come from a set of activities that constitute them as non-
autonomous. Only royal science, in contrast, has at its disposal a metric
power that can define a conceptual apparatus or an autonomy of science
(including the autonomy of experimental science). That is why it is nec-
essary to couple ambulant spaces with a space of homogeneity, without
which the laws of physics would depend on particular points in space.

But this is less a translation than a constitution: precisely that constitu-
tion the ambulant sciences did not undertake, and do not have the means
Problem II. Is there a way to extricate thought from the
to undertake. In the field of interaction of the two sciences, the ambulant
State model?

sciences confine themselves to inventing problems whose solution is
Proposition IV. The exteriority of the war machine is at-
tied to a whole set of collective, nonscientific activities but whose scien-
tested to, finally, by noology.

tific solution depends, on the contrary, on royal science and the way it
has transformed the problem by introducing it into its theorematic ap-
paratus and its organization of work. This is somewhat like intuition and
intelligence in Bergson, where only intelligence has the scientific means to
solve formally the problems posed by intuition, problems that intuition
Thought contents are sometimes criticized for being too conform-
would be content to entrust to the qualitative activities of a humanity
ist. But the primary question is that of form itself. Thought as such is
engaged in following matter.

already in conformity with a model that it borrows from the State ap-
paratus, and which defines for it goals and paths, conduits, channels,
organs, an entire organon. There is thus an image of thought covering
all of thought; it is the special object of “noology” and is like the State-
form developed in thought. This image has two heads, corresponding
to the two poles of sovereignty: the imperium of true thinking operat-
ing by magical capture, seizure or binding, constituting the efficacy of
a foundation (mytluiv); a republic of free spirits proceeding by pact or
contract, constituting a legislative and juridical organization, carrying
the sanction of a ground (logos). These two heads are in constant inter-
34
35
 
ference in the classical image of thought: a “republic of free spirits whose
thought a form of interiority, and thought gives that interiority a form
prince would be the idea of the Supreme Being.” And if these two heads
of universality: “The goal of worldwide organization is the satisfaction
are in interference, it is not only because there are many intermediaries
of reasonable individuals within particular free States.” The exchange
and transitions between them, and because the first prepares the way
that takes place between the State and reason is a curious one; but that
for the second and the second uses and retains the first, but also because,
exchange is also an analytic proposition, because realized reason is identi-
antithetical and complementary, they are necessary to one another It is
fied with the de jure State, just as the State is the becoming of reason.42
not out of the question, however, that in order to pass from one to the
In so-called modern philosophy, and in the so-called modern or rational
other there must occur, “between” them, an event of an entirely differ-
State, everything revolves around the legislator and the subject. The State
ent nature, one that hides outside the image, takes place outside.41 But
must realize the distinction between the legislator and the subject un-
confining ourselves to the image, it appears that it is not simply a meta-
der formal conditions permitting thought, for its part, to conceptualize
phor when we are told of an imperium of truth and a republic of spirits.

their identity. Always obey. The more you obey, the more you will be
It is the necessary condition for the constitution of thought as principle,
master, for you will only be obeying pure reason, in other words your-
or as a form of interiority, as a stratum.

self. However since philosophy assigned itself the role of ground it has
It is easy to see what thought gains from this: a gravity it would never
been giving the established powers its blessing, and tracing its doctrine
have on its own, a center that makes everything, including the State, ap-
of faculties onto the organs of State power. Common sense, the unity of
pear to exist by its own efficacy or on its own sanction. But the State gains
all the faculties at the center constituted by the Cogito, is the State con-
just as much. Indeed, by developing in thought in this way the State-form
sensus raised to the absolute. This was most notably the great operation
gains something essential: a whole consensus. Only thought is capable
of the Kantian “critique,” renewed and developed by Hegelianism. Kant
of inventing the fiction of a State that is universal by right, of elevat-
was constantly criticizing bad usages, the better to consecrate the func-
ing the State to the level of de jure universality. It is as if the sovereign
tion. It is not at all surprising that the philosopher has become a public
were left alone in the world, spanned the entire ecumenon, and now dealt
professor or State functionary. It was all over the moment the State-form
only with actual or potential subjects. It is no longer a question of pow-
inspired an image of thought. With full reciprocity. Doubtless, the image
erful, extrinsic organizations, or of strange bands: the State becomes the
itself assumes different contours in accordance with the variations on this
sole principle separating rebel subjects, who are consigned to the state of
form: it has not always delineated or designated the philosopher, and will
nature, from consenting subjects, who rally to its form of their own ac-
not always delineate him. It is possible to pass from a magical function
cord. If it is advantageous for thought to prop itself up with the State, it
to a rational function. The poet in the archaic imperial State was able to
is no less advantageous for the State to extend itself in thought, and to be
play the role of image trainer. In modern States, the sociologist succeeded
sanctioned by it as the unique, universal form. The particularity of States
in replacing the philosopher (as, for example, when Durkheim and his
becomes merely an accident of fact, as is their possible perversity, or their
disciples set out to give the republic a secular model of thought). Even
imperfection. For the modern State defines itself in principle as “the ra-
today, psychoanalysis lays claim to the role of Cogitatio universalis as
tional and reasonable organization of a community”: the only remaining
the thought of the Law, in a magical return. And there are quite a few
particularity a community has is interior or moral (the spirit of a peo-
other competitors and pretenders. Noology, which is distinct from ideol-
ple), at the same time as the community is funneled by its organization
ogy, is precisely the study of images of thought, and their historicity. In
toward the harmony of a universal (absolute spirit). The State gives
a sense, it could be said that all this has no importance, that thought has
36
37
 
never had anything but laughable gravity. But that is all it requires: for us
er—is not at all another image in opposition to the image inspired by
not to take it seriously. Because that makes it all the easier for it to think
the State apparatus. It is, rather, a force that destroys both the image
for us, and to be forever engendering new functionaries. Because the less
and its copies, the model and its reproductions, every possibility of
people take thought seriously, the more they think in conformity with
subordinating thought to a model of the True, the Just, or the Right
what the State wants. Truly, what man of the State has not dreamed of
(Cartesian truth, Kantian just, Hegelian right, etc.). A “method” is
that paltry impossible thing—to be a thinker’
the striated space of the cogitatio universalis and draws a path that
But noology is confronted by counterthoughts, which are violent in
must be followed from one point to another. But the form of exterior-
their acts and discontinuous in their appearances, and whose existence is
ity situates thought in a smooth space that it must occupy without
mobile in history. These are the acts of a “private thinker,” as opposed to
counting, and for which there is no possible method, no conceivable
the public professor: Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, or even Shestov. Wherever
reproduction, but only relays, intermezzos, resurgences. Thought is
they dwell, it is the steppe or the desert. They destroy images. Nietzsche’s
like the Vampire; it has no image, either to constitute a model of or
Schopenhauer as Educator is perhaps the greatest critique ever directed
to copy. In the smooth space of Zen, the arrow does not go from one
against the image of thought and its relation to the State. “Private
point to another but is taken up at any point, to be sent to any other
thinker,” however, is not a satisfactory expression, because it exagger-
point, and tends to permute with the archer and the target. The prob-
ates interiority, when it is a question of outside thought** To place
lem of the war machine is that of relaying, even with modest means,
thought in an immediate relation with the outside, with the forces
not that of the architectonic model or the monument. An ambulant
of the outside, in short to make thought a war machine, is a strange
people of relayers, rather than a model society. “Nature propels the
undertaking whose precise procedures can be studied in Nietzsche
philosopher into mankind like an arrow; it takes no aim but hopes
(the aphorism, for example, is very different from the maxim, for a
the arrow will stick somewhere. But countless times it misses and is
maxim, in the republic of letters, is like an organic State act or sover-
depressed at the fact. . . . The artist and the philosopher are evidence
eign judgment, whereas an aphorism always awaits its meaning from
against the purposiveness of nature as regards the means it employs,
a new external force, a final force that must conquer or subjugate it,
though they are also first-rate evidence as to the wisdom of its pur-
utilize it). There is another reason why “private thinker” is not a
pose. They strike home at only a few, while they ought to strike home
good expression. Although it is true that this counterthought attests
at everybody—and even these few are not struck with the force with
to an absolute solitude, it is an extremely populous solitude, like the
which the philosopher and artist launch their shot.

desert itself, a solitude already intertwined with a people to come, one
We have in mind in particular two pathetic texts, in the sense that
that invokes and awaits that people, existing only through it, though
in them thought is truly a pathos (an antilogos and an antimythos).

it is not yet here. “We are lacking that final force, in the absence of
One is a text by Artaud, in his letters to Jacques Riviere, explaining
a people to bear us. We are looking for that popular support.” Every
that thought operates on the basis of a central breakdown, that it lives
thought is already a tribe, the opposite of a State. And this form of ex-
solely by its own incapacity to take on form, bringing into relief only
teriority of thought is not at all symmetrical to the form of interior-
traits of expression in a material, developing peripherally, in a pure
ity. Strictly speaking, symmetry exists only between different poles or
milieu of exteriority, as a function of singularities impossible to uni-
focal points of interiority. But the form of exteriority of thought—the
versalize, of circumstances impossible to interiorize. The other is the
force that is always external to itself, or the final force, the nth pow-
text by Kleist, “On the Gradual Formation of Ideas in Speech” (“Uber
38
39
 
die allmachliche Verfertigung der Gedanken beim Reden”), in which
coming monuments, inspiring a model to be copied—a model far more
Kleist denounces the central interiority of the concept as a means of
insidious than the others—for the artificial stammerings and innumer-
control—the control of speech, of language, but also of affects, circum-
able tracings that claim to be their equal.

stances and even chance. He distinguishes this from thought as a pro-
The classical image of thought, and the striating of mental space it ef-
ceeding and a process, a bizarre anti-Platonic dialogue, an antidialogue
fects, aspires to universality. It in effect operates with two “universals,”
between brother and sister where one speaks before knowing while the
the Whole as the final ground of being or all-encompassing horizon,
other relays before having understood: this, Kleist says, is the thought
and the Subject as the principle that converts being into being-for-us pe-
of the Genua, which proceeds like a general in a war machine should,
rium and republic. Between the two, all of the varieties of the real and
or like a body charged with electricity, with pure intensity. “I mix in-
the true find their place in a striated mental space, from the double point
articulate sounds, lengthen transitional terms, as well as using apposi-
of view of Being and the Subject, under the direction of a “universal
tions when they are unnecessary.” Gain some time, and then perhaps
method.” It is now easy for us to characterize the nomad thought that
renounce, or wait. The necessity of not having control over language, of
rejects this image and does things differently. It does not ally itself with
being a foreigner in one’s own tongue, in order to draw speech to oneself
a universal thinking subject but, on the contrary, with a singular race;
and “bring something incomprehensible into the world.” Such is the
and it does not ground itself in an all-encompassing totality but is on the
form of exteriority, the relation between brother and sister, the becoming-
contrary deployed in a horizonless milieu that is a smooth space, steppe,
woman of the thinker, the becoming-thought of the woman: the Gemtit
desert, or sea. An entirely different type of adequation is established here,
that refuses to be controlled, that forms a war machine. A thought grap-
between the race defined as “tribe” and smooth space defined as “milieu.”
pling with exterior forces instead of being gathered up in an interior
A tribe in the desert instead of a universal subject within the horizon of
form, operating by relays instead of forming an image; an event-thought,
all- encompassing Being. Kenneth White recently stressed this dissym-
a haecceity, instead of a subject-thought, a problem-thought instead of an
metrical complementarily between a race-tribe (the Celts, those who feel
essence- thought or theorem; a thought that appeals to a people instead
they are Celts) and a milieu-space (the Orient, the Gobi desert...). White
of taking itself for a government ministry. Is it by chance that when-
demonstrates that this strange composite, the marriage of the Celt and
ever a “thinker” shoots an arrow, there is a man of the State, a shadow
the Orient, inspires a properly nomad thought that sweeps up English lit-
or an image of a man of the State, that counsels and admonishes him,
erature and constitutes American literature. We immediately see the dan-
and wants to assign him a target or “aim”? Jacques Riviere does not
gers, the profound ambiguities accompanying in this enterprise, as if each
hesitate to respond to Artaud: work at it, keep on working, things will
effort and each creation faced a possible infamy. For what can be done
come out all right, you will succeed in finding a method and in learn-
to prevent the theme of a race from turning into a racism, a dominant
ing to express clearly what you think in essence (cogitatio universa-
and all- encompassing fascism, or into a sect and a folklore, microfas-
lis). Riviere is not a head of State, but he would not be the last in the
cisms? And what can be done to prevent the oriental pole from becoming
Nouvelle Revue Francaise to mistake himself for the secret prince in
a phantasy that reactivates all the fascisms in a different way, and also all
a republic of letters or the gray eminence in a State of right. Lenz and
the folklores, yoga, Zen, and karate? It is certainly not enough to travel to
Kleist confronted Goethe, that grandiose genius, of all men of letters a
escape phantasy, and it is certainly not by invoking a past, real or mythi-
veritable man of the State. But that is not the worst of it: the worst is
cal, that one avoids racism. But here again, the criteria for making the
the way the texts of Kleist and Artaud themselves have ended up be-
distinction are simple, whatever the de facto mixes that obscure them at
40
41
  
a given level, at a given moment. The race-tribe exists only at the level of
an oppressed race, and in the name of the oppression it suffers: there is no
race but inferior, minoritarian; there is no dominant race; a race is defined
not by its purity but rather by the impurity conferred upon it by a system
of domination. Bastard and mixed-blood are the true names of race. Rim-
baud said it all on this point: only he or she can invoke race who says,
“I have always been of an inferior race... I am of an inferior race for all
eternity. . . There I am on the Breton shore ... I am a beast, a nigger ... I
am of a distant race: my ancestors were Norsemen.” In the same way that
race is not something to be rediscovered, the Orient is not something to
be imitated: it only exists in the construction of a smooth space Just as
race only exists in the constitution of a tribe that peoples and traverses a
smooth space. All of thought is a becoming, a double becoming, rather
than the attribute of a Subject and the representation of a Whole.

AXIOM II. The war machine is the invention of the no-
mads (insofar as it is exterior to the State apparatus and
distinct from the military intuition). As such, the war
machine has three aspects, a spatiogeographic aspect, an
arithmetic or algebraic aspect. and an affective aspect.

Proposition V. Nomad existence necessarily effectuates the
conditions of the war machine in space.

The nomad has a territory; he follows customary paths; he goes from
one point to another; he is not ignorant of points (water points, dwell-
ing points, assembly points, etc.). But the question is what in nomad
life is a principle and what is only a consequence. To begin with, al-
though the points determine paths, they are strictly subordinated^ the
paths they determine, the reverse of what happens with the sedentary.

The water point is reached only in order to be left behind; every point is
a relay and exists only as a relay. A path is always between two points, but
then-between has taken on all the consistency and enjoys both autonomy
42
43
 
and a direction of its own. The life of the nomad is the intermezzo. Even
does not depart, does not want to depart, who clings to the smooth
the elements of his dwelling are conceived in terms of the trajectory
space left by the receding forest, where the steppe or the desert advanc-
that is forever mobilizing them.* The nomad is not at all the same as
es, and who invents nomadism as a response to this challenge.52 Of
the migrant; for the migrant goes principally from one point to another,
course, the nomad moves, but while seated, and he is only seated while
even if the second point is uncertain, unforeseen, or not well localized.

moving (the Bedouin galloping, knees on the saddle, sitting on the
But the nomad goes from point to point only as a consequence and as
soles of his upturned feet, “a feat of balance”). The nomad knows how
a factual necessity; in principle, points for him are relays along a trajec-
to wait, he has infinite patience. Immobility and speed, catatonia and
tory. Nomads and migrants can mix in many ways, or form a common
rush, a “stationary process,” station as process—these traits of Kleist’s are
aggregate; their causes and conditions are no less distinct for that (for
eminently those of the nomad. It is thus necessary to make a distinc-
example, those who joined Mohammed at Medina had a choice between
tion between speed and movement: a movement may be very fast, but
a nomadic or Bedouin pledge, and a pledge of hegira or emigration).

that does not give it speed; a speed may be very slow, or even immobile,
Second, even though the nomadic trajectory may follow trails or cus-
yet it is still speed. Movement is extensive; speed is intensive. Movement
tomary routes, it does not fulfill the function of the sedentary road,
designates the relative character of a body considered as “one,” and which
which is to parcel out a closed space to people, assigning each person
goes from point to point; speed, on the contrary; constitutes the abso-
a share and regulating the communication between shares. The nomadic
lute character of a body whose irreducible parts (atoms) occupy or
trajectory does the opposite: it distributes people (or animals) in an
fill a smooth space in the manner of a vortex, with the possibility of
open space, one that is indefinite and noncommunicating. The nomas
springing up at any point. (It is therefore not surprising that reference
came to designate the law, but that was originally because it was distri-
has been made to spiritual voyages effected without relative movement,
bution, a mode of distribution. It is a very special kind of distribu-
but in intensity, in one place: these are part of nomadism.) In short, we
tion, one without division into shares, in a space without borders or
will say by convention that only nomads have absolute movement, in
enclosure. The nomas is the consistency of a fuzzy aggregate: it is in
other words, speed; vortical or swirling movement is an essential feature
this sense that it stands in opposition to the law or the polis, as the
of their war machine.

backcountry, a mountainside, or the vague expanse around a city (“ei-
It is in this sense that nomads have no points, paths, or land, even
ther nomos or polis”). Therefore, and this is the third point, there is
though they do by all appearances. If the nomad can be called the Deter-
a significant difference between the spaces: sedentary space is striated,
ritorialized par excellence, it is precisely because there is no reterritori-
by walls, enclosures, and roads between enclosures, while nomad space
alization afterward as with the migrant, or upon something else as
is smooth, marked only by “traits” that are effaced and displaced with
with the sedentary (the sedentary’s relation with the earth is mediatized
the trajectory. Even the lamellae of the desert slide over each other,
by something else, a property regime, a State apparatus). With the no-
producing an inimitable sound. The nomad distributes himself in a
mad, on the contrary, it is deterritorialization that constitutes the rela-
smooth space; he occupies, inhabits, holds that space; that is his ter-
tion to the earth, to such a degree that the nomad reterritorializes on
ritorial principle. It is therefore false to define the nomad by move-
deterritorialization itself. It is the earth that deterritorializes itself, in
ment. Toynbee is profoundly right to suggest that the nomad is on the
a way that provides the nomad with a territory. The land ceases to be
contrary he who does not move. Whereas the migrant leaves behind a
land, tending to become simply ground (sol) or support. The earth
milieu that has become amorphous or hostile, the nomad is one who
does not become deterritorialized in its global and relative movement,
44
45
 
but at specific locations, at the spot where the forest recedes, or where
general characteristic of religion (recognizing that the nature of the ap-
the steppe and the desert advance. Hubac is right to say that nomad.sm
pearance, and the legitimacy, or lack thereof, of the images that reproduce
is explainable less by universal changes in climate (which relate instead
it are ŘRGP to debate)? But the sacred place of religion is fundamentally a
to migrations) as by the “divagation of local climates.”” The nomads are
center hat repels the obscure nomas. The absolute of religion is essentially
there, on the land, wherever there forms a smooth space that gnaws, and
a horizon that encompasses, and, if the absolute itself appears at a particu-
tends to grow, in all directions. The nomads inhabit these places; they
lar place, it does so in order to establish a solid and stable center for the
remain in them, and they themselves make them grow, for it has been
global I he encompassing role of smooth spaces (desert, steppe, or ocean)
established that the nomads make the desert no less than they are made
in nonotheism has been frequently noted. In short, religion converts the
by it. They are vectors of deterritorialization. They add desert to desert,
absolute. Religion is in this sense a piece in the State apparatus (in both of
steppe to steppe, by a series of local operations whose orientation and
its forms, the “bond” and the “pact or alliance”), even if it has within
direction endlessly vary.” The sand desert has not only oases which are
itself the power to elevate this model to the level of the universal or to
like fixed points, but also rhizomatic vegetation that is temporary and
constitute an absolute Imperium. But for the nomad the terms of the
shifts location according to local rains, bringing changes in the direction
question are totally different: locality is not delimited; the absolute,
of the crossings.” The same terms are used to describe ice deserts as sand
then, does not appear at a particular place but becomes a nonlimited
deserts: there is no line separating earth and sky; there is no intermediate
locality; the coupling of the place and the absolute is achieved not in a
distance, no perspective or contour; visibility is limited; and yet there is an
centered, oriented globalization or universalization but in an infinite
extraordinarily fine topology that relies not on points or objects but rath-
succession of local operations. Limiting ourselves to this opposition
er on haecceities, on sets of relations (winds, undulations of snow or sand,
between points of view, it may be observed that nomads do not pro-
the song of the sand or the creaking of ice, the tactile qualities of both). It
vide a favorable terrain for religion; the man of war is always commit-
is a tactile space, or rather “haptic,” a sonorous much more than a visual
ting an offense against the priest or the god. The nomads have a vague,
space.56 The variability, the poly vocality of directions, is an essential fea-
literally vagabond “monotheism,” and content themselves with that,
ture of smooth spaces of the rhizome type, and it alters their cartography.

and with their ambulant fires. The nomads have a sense of the ab-
The nomad, nomad space, is localized and not delimited. What is both
solute, but a singularly atheistic one. The universalist religions that
limited and limiting is striated space, the relative global: it is limited in
have had dealings with nomads—Moses, Mohammed, even Christianity
its parts, which are assigned constant directions, are oriented in relation to
with the Nestorian heresy—have always encountered problems in this
one another, divisible by boundaries, and can interlink; what is limiting
regard, and have run up against what they have termed obstinate impi-
(limes or wall, and no longer boundary) is this aggregate in relation to the
ety. These religions are not, in effect, separable from a firm and constant
smooth spaces it “contains,” whose growth it slows or prevents, and which
orientation, from an imperial de jure State, even, and especially, in the
it restricts or places outside. Even when the nomad sustains its effects he
absence of a de facto State; they have promoted an ideal of sedentarization
does not belong to this relative global, where one passes from one point
and addressed themselves more to the migrant components than the no-
to another, from one region to another. Rather, he is in a local absolute
madic ones. Even early Islam favored the theme of the hegira, or migra-
an absolute that is manifested locally, and engendered in a series of local
tion, over nomadism; rather, it was through certain schisms (such as the
operations of varying orientations: desert, steppe, ice, sea.

Kahariji movement) that it won over the Arab or Berber nomads.57
Making the absolute appear in a particular place—is that not a very
However, it does not exhaust the question to establish a simple op-
46
47
 
position between two points of view, religion-nomadism. For monothe-
variability of directions, broken and changing, and intrinsically pos-
istic religion, at the deepest level of its tendency to project a universal or
sesses all these factors or all these variables from the moment it turns
spiritual State over the entire ecumenon, is not without ambivalence or
religion into a war machine and simultaneously utilizes and gives rise to
fringe areas; it goes beyond even the ideal limits of the State, even the im-
the corresponding nomadism.59 The necessity of maintaining the most
perial State, entering a more indistinct zone, an outside of States where
rigorous of distinctions between sedentaries, migrants, and nomads does
it has the possibility of undergoing a singular mutation or adaptation.

not preclude de facto mixes; on the contrary, it makes them all the more
We are referring to religion as an element in a war machine and the idea
necessary in turn. And it is impossible to think of the general process
of holy war as the motor of that machine. The prophet, as opposed to
of sedentarization that vanquished the nomads without also envisioning
the state personality of the king and the religious personality of the
the gusts of local nomadization that carried off sedentaries and doubled
priest, directs the movement by which a religion becomes a war machine
migrants (notably, to the benefit of religion).

or passes over to the side of such a machine. It has often been said that
Smooth or nomad space lies between two striated spaces: that of the
Islam, and the prophet Mohammed, performed such a conversion of
forest, with its gravitational verticals, and that of agriculture, with its
religion and constituted a veritable esprit de corps: in the formula of
grids and generalized parallels, its now independent arborescence, its art
Georges Bataille, “early Islam, a society reduced to the military enter-
of extracting the tree and wood from the forest. But being “between”
prise.” This is what the West invokes in order to justify its antipathy
also means that smooth space is controlled by these two flanks, which
toward Islam. Yet the Crusades were a properly Christian adventure of
limit it, oppose its development, and assign it as much as possible a com-
this type. The prophets may very well condemn nomad life; the war
municational role; or, on the contrary, it means that it turns against them,
machine may very well favor the movement of migration and the ide-
gnawing away at the forest on one side, on the other side gaining ground
al of establishment; religion in general may very well compensate for
on the cultivated lands, affirming a noncommunicating force or a force
its specific deterritorialization with a spiritual and even physical reter-
of divergence like a “wedge” digging in. The nomads turn first against
ritorialization, which in the case of the holy war assumes the well-
the forest and the mountain dwellers, then descend upon the farmers.

directed character of a conquest of the holy lands as the center of the
What we have here is something like the flipside or the outside of
world. Despite all that, when religion sets itself up as a war machine,
the State-form—but in what sense? This form, as a global and relative
it mobilizes and liberates a formidable charge of nomadism or absolute
space, implies a certain number of components: forest-clearing of fields;
deterritorialization; it doubles the migrant with an accompanying
agriculture-grid laying; animal raising subordinated to agricultural
nomad, or with the potential nomad the migrant is in the process
work and sedentary food production; commerce based on a constella-
of becoming; and finally, it turns its dream of an absolute State back
tion of town-country (polis-nomos) communications. When histo-
against the State-form.5* And this turning-against is no less a part of
rians inquire into the reasons for the victory of the West over the
the “essence” of religion than that dream. The history of the Crusades
Orient, they primarily mention the following characteristics, which
is marked by the most astonishing series of directional changes: the firm
put the Orient in general at a disadvantage: deforestation rather than
orientation toward the Holy Land as a center to reach often seems noth-
clearing for planting, making it extremely difficult to extract or even
ing more than a pretext. But it would be wrong to say that the play of
to find wood; cultivation of the type “rice paddy and garden” rather
self-interest, or economic, commercial, or political factors, diverted the
than arborescence and field; animal raising for the most part outside
crusade from its pure path. The idea of the crusade in itself implies this
the control of the sedentarics, with the result that they lacked animal
48
49
 
power and meat foods; the low communication content of the town-
tion in the service of striated space. It is a vital concern of every State
country relation, making commerce far less flexible.60 The conclusion
not only to vanquish nomadism but to control migrations and, more
is not that the State-form is absent in the Orient. Quite to the contrary,
generally, to establish a zone of rights over an entire “exterior,” over all
a more rigid agency becomes necessary in order to retain and reunite the
of the flows traversing the ecumenon. If it can help it, the State does not
various components plied by escape vectors. States always have the same
dissociate itself from a process of capture of Hows of all kinds, popula-
composition; if there is even one truth in the political philosophy of
tions, commodities or commerce, money or capital, etc. There is still a
Hegel, it is that every State carries within itself the essential moments
need for fixed paths in well-defined directions, which restrict speed,
of its existence. States are made up not only of people but also of wood,
regulate circulation, relativize movement, and measure in detail the
fields, gardens, animals, and commodities. There is a unity of composi-
relative movements of subjects and objects. That is why Paul Virilio’s
tion of all States, but States have neither the same development nor the
thesis is important, when he shows that “the political power of the
same organization. In the Orient, the components are much more dis-
State is polis, police, that is, management of the public ways,” and that
connected, disjointed, necessitating a great immutable Form to hold them
“the gates of the city, its levies and duties, are barriers, filters against
together: “despotic formations,” Asian or African, are rocked by incessant
the fluidity of the masses, against the penetration power of migratory
revolts, by secessions and dynastic changes, which nevertheless do not
packs,” people, animals, and goods. (gravity, gravitas, such is the es-
affect the immutability of the form. In the West, on the other hand, the
sence of the State. It is not at all that the State knows nothing of speed;
interconnectedness of the components makes possible transformations of
but it requires that movement, even the fastest, cease to be the absolute
the State-form through revolution. It is true that the idea of revolution
state of a moving body occupying a smooth space, to become the rela-
itself is ambiguous; it is Western insofar as it relates to a transformation of
tive characteristic of a “moved body” going from one point to another
the State, but Eastern insofar as it envisions the destruction, the abolition
in a striated space. In this sense, the State never ceases to decompose,
of the State.61 The great empires of the Orient, Africa, and America run
recompose, and transform movement, or to regulate speed. The State
up against wide-open smooth spaces that penetrate them and maintain
as town surveyor, converter, or highway interchange: the role of the en-
gaps between their components (the nomos does not become countryside,
gineer from this point of view. Speed and absolute movement are not
the countryside does not communicate with the town, large- scale ani-
without their laws, but they are the laws of the nomos> of the smooth
mal raising is the affair of the nomads, etc.): the oriental State is in direct
space that deploys it, of the war machine that populates it. If the nomads
confrontation with a nomad war machine. This war machine may fall
formed the war machine, it was by inventing absolute speed, by being
back to the road of integration and proceed solely by revolt and dynastic
“synonymous” with speed. And each time there is an operation against
change; nevertheless, it is the war machine, as nomad, that invents the
the State— insubordination, rioting, guerrilla warfare, or revolution as
abolitionist dream and reality. Western States are much more sheltered in
act—it can be said that a war machine has revived, that a new nomadic
their striated space and consequently have much more latitude in hold-
potential has* appeared, accompanied by the reconstitution of a smooth
ing their components together; they confront the nomads only indi-
space or a manner of being in space as though it were smooth (Virilio
rectly, through the intermediary of the migrations the nomads trigger
discusses the importance of the riot or revolutionary theme of “hold-
or adopt as their stance.

ing the street”). It is in this sense that the response of the State against
One of the fundamental tasks of the State is to striate the space over
all that threatens to move beyond it is to striate space. The State does not
which it reigns, or to utilize smooth spaces as a means of communica-
appropriate the war machine without giving even it the form of relative
50
51
 
movement: this was the case with the model of the fortress as a regula-
it reimparts smooth in the wake of the striated. It is true that this new
tor of movement, which was precisely the obstacle the nomads came up
nomadism accompanies a worldwide war machine whose organization
against, the stumbling block and parry by which absolute vortical move-
exceeds the State apparatuses and passes into energy, military-industrial,
ment was broken. Conversely, when a State does not succeed in striating
and multinational complexes. We say this as a reminder that smooth
its interior or neighboring space, the flows traversing that State neces-
space and the form of exteriority do not have an irresistible revolutionary
sarily adopt the stance of a war machine directed against it, deployed in
calling but change meaning drastically depending on the interactions they
a hostile or rebellious smooth space (even if other States are able to slip
are part of and the concrete conditions of their exercise or establishment
their striations in). This was the adventure of China: toward the end of
(for example, the way in which total war and popular war, and even guer-
the fourteenth century, and in spite of its very high level of technology
rilla warfare, borrow one another’s methods).

in ships and navigation, it turned its back on its huge maritime space,
saw its commercial flows turn against it and ally themselves with piracy,
and was unable to react except by a politics of immobility, of the mas-
sive restriction of commerce, which only reinforced the connection
between commerce and the war machine.

The situation is much more complicated than we have let on. The
sea is perhaps principal among smooth spaces, the hydraulic model par
excellence. But the sea is also, of all smooth spaces, the first one at-
tempts were made to striate, to transform into a dependency of the land,
with its fixed routes, constant directions, relative movements, a whole
counterhydraulie of channels and conduits. One of the reasons for the
hegemony of the West was the power of its State apparatuses to striate
the sea by combining the technologies of the North and the Mediter-
ranean and by annexing the Atlantic. But this undertaking had the
most unexpected result: the multiplication of relative movements, the
intensification of relative speeds in striated space, ended up reconstitut-
ing a smooth space or absolute movement. As Virilio emphasizes, the sea
became the place of the fleet in being, where one no longer goes from
one point to another, but rather holds space beginning from any point:
instead of striating space, one occupies it with a vector of deterritori-
alization in perpetual motion. This modern strategy was communicated
from the sea to the air, as the new smooth space, but also to the entire
Earth considered as desert or sea. As converter and capturer, the State does
not just relativize movement, it reimparts absolute movement. It does
not just go from the smooth to the striated, it reconstitutes smooth space;
52
53
N o m a d o l o g y : T h e W a r M a c h i n e
ther-in-law, Jethro the Kenite, and was done in such a way as to consti-
tute a war machine. the elements of which are described in the biblical
book of Numbers. The nomas is fundamentally numerical arithmetic.

When Greek geometrism is contrasted with Indo-Arab arithmetism,
it becomes clear that the later implies a nomos opposable to the logos:
not that the nomads “do” arithmetic or algebra, but because arithmetic
and algebra arise in a strongly nomad influenced world
Up to now we have known three major types of human organiza-
tion- lineal, territorial, and numerical. Lineal organization allows
us to define so-called primitive societies. Clan lineages are essentially
segments in action; they meld and divide, and vary according to the
ancestor considered, the tasks, and the circumstances. Of course, num-
ber plays an important role in the determination of lineage, or in the
creation of new lineages—as does the earth, since a clan segmentarity is
Proposition VI. Nomad existence necessarily implies the
doubled by a tribal segmentarity. The earth is before all else the matter
numerical elements of a war machine.

upon which the dynamic of lineages is inscribed, and the number, a means
of inscription- the lineages write upon the earth and with the number,
constituting a kind of ‘geodesy.” Everything changes with State societies:
it is often said that the territorial principle becomes dominant. One could
also speak of deterritorialization, since the earth becomes an object, instead of
Tens, hundreds, thousands, myriads: all armies retain these decimal
being an active material element in combination with lineage. Property
groupings, to the point that each time they are encountered it is safe
is precisely the deterritorialized relation between the human being and
to assume the presence of a military organization. Is this not the way
the earth- this is so whether property constitutes a good belonging to
an army deterritorializes its soldiers? An army is composed of units,
the State superposed upon continuing possession by a lineal community,
companies, and divisions. The Numbers may vary in function, in com-
or whether it itself becomes a good belonging to private individuals con-
bination; they may enter into entirely different strategies; but there is
stituting a new community. In both cases (and according to the two poles
always a connection between the Number and the war machine. It is a
of the State) something like an overcoding of the earth replaces geodesy. Of
question not of quantity but of organization or composition. When the
course lineages remain very important, and numbers take on their own
State creates armies, it always applies this principle of numerical orga-
importance But what moves to the forefront is a “territorial” organization,
nization; but all it does is adopt the principle, at the same time as it
in the sense that all the segments, whether of lineage, land, or number,
appropriates the war machine. For so peculiar an idea—the numerical
are taken up by an astronomical space or a geometrical extension that
organization of people—came from the nomads. It was the Hyksos,
overcodes them— but certainly not in the same way in the archaic impe-
conquering nomads, who brought it to Egypt; and when Moses ap-
rial State and in modern States. The archaic State envelops a spatium
plied u to his people in exodus, it was on the advice of his nomad fa-
with a summit a differentiated space with depth amid levels, whereas
54
55
 
modern States (beginning with the Greek city-state) develop a homoge-
numbers appear as soon as one distributes something in space, instead
neous extensio with an immanent center, divisible homologous parts,
of dividing up space or distributing space itself. The number becomes
and symmetneal and reversible relations. Not only do the two mod-
a subject. The independence of the number in relation to space is a re-
els, the astronomical and the geometrical, enter into intimate mixes,
sult not of abstraction but of the concrete nature of smooth space, which
but even when they are supposedly pure, both imply the subordination
is occupied without itself being counted. The number is no longer a
of lineages and numbers to this metric power, as it appears either in the
means of counting or measuring but of moving: it is the number itself
imperial spatium or in the political extension Arithmetic, the num-
that moves through smooth space. There is undoubtedly a geometry of
ber, has always had a decisive role in the State apparatus: this is so even
smooth space: but as we have seen, it is a minor, operative geometry, a
as early as the imperial bureaucracy, with the three conjoined opera-
geometry of the trait. The more independent space is from a metrics,
tions of the census, taxation, and election. It is even truer of modern
the more independent the number is from space. Geometry as a royal
forms of the State, which in developing utilized all the calculation
science has little importance for the war machine (its only importance
techniques that were springing up at the border between mathematical
is in State armies, and for sedentary fortification, but it leads generals
science and social technology (there is a whole social calculus at the
to serious defeats).68 The number becomes a principle whenever it oc-
basis of political economy, demography, the organization of work, etc.).

cupies a smooth space, and is deployed within it as subject, instead of
This arithmetic element of the State found its specific power in the
measuring a striated space. The number is the mobile occupant, the
treatment of all kinds of matter: primary matters (raw materials), the
movable (meuhle) in smooth space, as opposed to the geometry of the
secondary matter of wrought objects, or the ultimate matter consti-
immovable (immeuble) in striated space. The nomadic numerical unit
tuted by the human population. Thus the number has always served
is the ambulant fire, and not the tent, which is still too much of an
to gain mastery over matter, to control its variations and movements,
immovable: “The (ire takes precedence over the yurt.” The numbering
in other words, to submit them to the spatiotemporal framework of
number is no longer subordinated to metric determinations or geomet-
the State—either the imperial spatium, or the modern extension1 The
rical dimensions, but has only a dynamic relation with geographical
State has a territorial principle, or a principle of deterritorialization,
directions: it is a directional number, not a dimensional or metric one.

that links the number to metric magnitudes (taking into account the
Nomad organization is indissolubly arithmetic and directional;
increasingly complex metrics effecting the overcoding). We do not believe
quantity is everywhere, tens, hundreds, direction is everywhere, left,
that the conditions of independence or autonomy of the Number are to
right: the numerical chief is also the chief of the left or the right.”*’
be found in the State, even though all the factors of its development are
The numbering number is rhythmic, not harmonic. It is not related to
present.

cadence or measure: it is only in State armies, and for reasons of disci-
The Numbering Number, in other words, autonomous arithmetic
pline and show, that one marches in cadence; but autonomous numerical
organization, implies neither a superior degree of abstraction nor very
organization finds its meaning elsewhere, whenever it is necessary to es-
large quantities. It relates only to conditions of possibility constituted
tablish an order of displacement on the steppe, the desert—at the point
by nomadism and to conditions of effectuation constituted by the war
where the lineages of the forest dwellers and the figures of the State lose
machine. It is in State armies that the problem of the treatment of large
their relevance. “He moved with the random walk which made only
quantities arises, in relation to other matters; but the war machine oper-
those sounds natural to the desert. Nothing in his passage would [indi-
ates with small quantities that it treats using numbering numbers. These
cate] that human flesh moved there. It was a way of walking so deeply
56
57
 
conditioned in him that he didn’t need to think about it. I he feet moved
other words, by its distribution of heterogeneity in a free space. Even
of themselves, no measurable rhythm to their pacing.”70 In the war ma-
State armies do not do away with this principle when they deal with
chine and nomadic existence, the number is no longer numbered, but
large numbers (despite the predominance of “base” 10). The Roman le-
becomes a Cipher (Chiffre), and it is in this capacity that it constitutes
gion was a number made up of numbers, articulated in such a way that
the “esprit de corps” and invents the secret and its outgrowths (strategy,
the segments became mobile, and the figures geometrical, changing, trans-
espionage, war ruses, ambush, diplomacy, etc.).

formational. The complex or articulated number comprises not only
A ciphered, rhythmic, directional, autonomous, movable, numbering
men but necessarily weapons, animals, and vehicles. The arithmetic
number: the war machine is like me necessary consequence of nomad-
base unit is therefore a unit of assemblage, for example, man-horse-bow,
ic organization (Moses experienced it, with all its consequences). Some
1 x I x 1, according to the formula that carried the Scythians to triumph;
people nowadays are too eager to criticize this numerical organization,
and the formula becomes more complicated to the extent that certain
denouncing it as a military or even concentration-camp society where
“weapons” assemble or articulate several men or animals, as in the case
people are no longer anything more than deterritorialized “numbers.”
of the chariot with two horses and two men, one to drive and the other
But that is false. Horror for horror, the numerical organization of people
to throw, 2 x 1 X2 = 1; or in the case of the famous two-handled shield
is certainly no cruder than the lineal or State organizations. Treating peo-
of the hoplite reform, which soldered together human chains. However
ple like numbers is not necessarily worse than treating them like trees to
small the unit, it is articulated. The numbering number always has
prune, or geometrical figures to shape and model. Moreover, the use of the
several bases at the same time. It is also necessary to take into account
number as a numeral, as a statistical element, is proper to the numbered
arithmetic relations that are external yet still contained in the number,
number of the State, not to the numbering number. And the world of
expressing the proportion of combatants among the members of a lineage
the concentration camp operates as much by lineages and territories as by
or tribe, the role of reserves and stocks, the upkeep of people, things,
numeration. The question is not one of good or bad but of specificity.

and animals. Logistics is the art of these external relations, which are no
The specificity of numerical organization rests on the nomadic mode of
less a part of the war machine than the internal relations of strategy, in
existence and the war machine function. The numbering number is
other words, the composition of combat units in relation to one another.

distinct both from lineal codes and State overcoding. Arithmetic com-
The two together constitute the science of the articulation of numbers of
position, on the one hand, selects, extracts from the lineages the ele-
war. Every assemblage has this strategic aspect and this logistical aspect.

ments that will enter into nomadism and the war machine and,
But the numbering number has a second, more secret, characteristic.

on the other hand, directs them against the State apparatus, opposing
Everywhere, the war machine displays a curious process of arithmetic
a machine and an existence to the State apparatus, drawing a deter-
replication or doubling, as if it operated along two nonsymmetrical and
ritorialization that cuts across both the lineal territorialities and the
nonequal series. On the one hand, the lineages are indeed organized and
territory or deterritorialitv of the State.

reshuffled numerically; a numerical composition is superimposed upon
A first characteristic of the numbering, nomadic or war, number is
the lineages in order to bring the new principle into predominance. But
that it is always complex, that is, articulated- A complex of numbers
on the other hand, men are simultaneously extracted from each lineage
every time. It is exactly for this reason that it in no way implies large,
to form a special numerical body—as if the new numerical composition
homogenized quantities, like State numbers or the numbered number,
of the lineage-body could not succeed without the constitution of a body
but rather produces its effect of immensity by its fine articulation, in
proper to it, itself numerical. We believe that this is not an accidental
58
59
 
phenomenon but rather an essential constituent of the war machine, a
former autonomy; nor is it the pre figuration of a struggle for control
necessary operation for the autonomy of the number: the number of
over a State apparatus. It is a tension inherent in the war machine, in its
the body must have as its correlate a body of the number; the number
special power, and in the particular limitations placed on the power of
must be doubled according to two complementary operations. For
the “chief.”
the social body to be numerized, the number must form a special body.

Thus numerical composition, or the numbering number, implies
When Genghis Khan undertook his great composition of the steppe,
several operations: the arithmetization of the starting aggregates or sets
he numerically organized the lineages, and the fighters in each lineage,
(the lineages); the union of the extracted subsets (the constitution of
placing them under a cipher and a chief (groups often with decuri-
groups often, one hundred, etc.); and the formation by substitution
ons, groups of one hundred with centurions, groups of one thousand
of another set in correspondence with the united set (the special body).

with chiliarchs). He also extracted from each arithmetized lineage a
It is this last operation that implies the most variety and original-
small number of men who were to constitute his personal guard, in
ity in nomad existence. The same problem arises even in State armies,
other words, a dynamic formation comprising a staff, commissars, mes-
when the war machine is appropriated by the State. In effect, if the
sengers, and diplomats (“antrustions”). One is never without the other:
arithmetization of the social body has as its correlate the formation
a double deterritorialization, the second of which is to a higher power.

of a distinct special body, itself arithmetic, this special body may be
When Moses undertook his great composition of the desert—where the
constructed in several ways: (1) from a privileged lineage or tribe, the
influence he felt from the nomads was necessarily stronger than that of
dominance of which subsequently takes on a new meaning (the case
Yahweh—he took a census of each tribe and organized them numeri-
of Moses, with the Levites); (2) from representatives of each lineage,
cally; he also decreed a law according to which the firstborn of each tribe
who subsequently serve also as hostages (the firstborn; this would ac-
at that particular time belonged by right to Yahweh. As these firstborn
tually be the Asian case, or the case of Genghis); (3) from a totally
were obviously still too young, their role in the Number was transferred
different element, one exterior to the base society, slaves, foreigners,
to a special tribe, the Levites, who provided the body of the Number or
or people of another religion (this was already the case as early as the
the special guard of the ark; and as the Levites were less numerous than
Saxon regime, in which the king used Prankish slaves to compose his
the new firstborn of the tribes taken together, the excess firstborn had to
special body; but Islam is the prime example, even inspiring a spe-
be bought back by the tribes in the form of taxes (bringing us back to
cific sociological category, that of “military slavery”: the Mameluks of
a fundamental aspect of logistics). The war machine would be unable to
Egypt, slaves from the steppe or the Caucasus who were purchased at
function without this double series: it is necessary both that numerical
a very early age by the sultan; or the Ottoman Janissaries, who came
composition replace lineal organization and that it conjure away the
from Christian communities).72
territorial organization of the State. Power in the war machine is defined
Is this not the origin of an important theme, “the nomads as child
according to this double series: power is no longer based on segments and
stealers”? It is clear, especially in the last example, how the special body is
centers, on the potential resonance of centers and overcoding of segments,
instituted as an element determinant of power in the war machine. The
but on these relations internal to the Number and independent of quan-
war machine and nomadic existence have to ward off two things simul-
tity. Tensions or power struggles are also a result of this: between Moses’
taneously: a return of the lineal aristocracy and the formation of impe-
tribes and the Levites, between Genghis’s “noyans” and “antrustions.”
rial functionaries. What complicates everything is that the State itself has
This is not simply a protest on the part of lineages wishing to regain their
often been determined in such a way as to use slaves as high functionar-
60
61
 
ies. As we shall see, the reasons for this varied, and although the two
political counseling from renegades from an imperial State is highly
currents converged in armies, they came from two distinct sources. For
improbable). It is difficult to see how the nomads could have undertaken
the power of slaves, foreigners, or captives in a war machine of nomad-
to destroy cities and States, except in the name of a nomad organization
ic origin is very different from the power of lineal aristocracies, as well
and a war machine defined not by ignorance but by their positive char-
as from that of State functionaries and bureaucrats. They are “commis-
acteristics, by their specific space, by a composition all their own that
sars,” emissaries, diplomats, spies, strategists, and logisticians, sometimes
broke with lineages and warded off the State-form. History has always
smiths. They cannot be explained away as a “whim of the sultan.” On
dismissed the nomads. Attempts have been made to apply a properly
the contrary, it is the possibility of the war chief having whims that is
military category to the war machine (that of “military democracy”)
explained by the objective existence and necessity of this special numeri-
and a properly sedentary category to nomadism (that of “feudalism”).

cal body, this Cipher that has value only in relation to a nomas. There
But these two hypotheses presuppose a territorial principle: either that
is both a deterritorialization and a becoming proper to the war machine;
an imperial State appropriates the war machine, distributing land to
the special body, in particular the slave-infidel-foreigner, is the one who
warriors as a benefit of their position (cleroi and false fiefs), or that
becomes a soldier and believer while remaining deterritorialized in
property, once it has become private, in itself posits relations of depen-
relation to the lineages and the State. You have to be born an infidel to
dence among the property owners constituting the army (true fiefs and
become a believer; you have to be born a slave to become a soldier. Specific
vassalage).In both cases, the number is subordinated to an “immo-
schools or institutions are needed for this purpose: the special body is
bile” fiscal organization, in order to establish which land can be or has
an invention proper to the war machine, which States always utilize,
been ceded, as well as to set the taxes owed by the beneficiaries themselves.

adapting it so totally to their own ends that it becomes unrecognizable,
There is no doubt that nomad organization and the war machine deal
or restituting it in bureaucratic staff form, or in the technocratic form of
with these same problems, both the level of land and of taxation (in which
very special bodies, or in “esprit de corps” that serve the State as much
the nomadic warriors were great innovators, despite what is said to the
as they resist it, or among the commissars who double the State as
contrary). But they invent a territoriality and a “movable” fiscal organi-
much as they serve it.

zation that testify to the autonomy of a numerical principle: there can
It is true that the nomads have no history; they only have a ge-
be a confusion or combination of the systems, but the specificity of the
ography. And the defeat of the nomads was such, so complete, that
nomadic system remains the subordination of land to numbers that
history is one with the triumph of States. We have witnessed, as
are displaced and deployed, and of taxation to relations internal to those
a result, a generalized critique dismissing the nomads as incapable
numbers (already with Moses, for example, taxation played a role in the
of any innovation, whether technological or metallurgical, political
relation between the numerical bodies and the special body of the num-
or metaphysical. Historians, bourgeois or Soviet (Grousset or Vladi-
ber). In short, military democracy and feudalism, far from explaining
mirtsov), consider the nomads a pitiable segment of humanity that
the numerical composition of the nomads, instead testify to what may
understands nothing: not technology, to which it supposedly remained
survive of them in sedentary regimes.

indifferent: not agriculture, not the cities and States it destroyed or
conquered. It is difficult to see, however, how the nomads could have
triumphed in war if they did not possess strong metallurgical capa-
bilities (the idea that the nomads received their technical weapons and
62
63
N o m a d o l o g y : T h e W a r M a c h i n e
mate. As a first approximation, weapons have a privileged relation
with projection. Anything that throws or is thrown is fundamen-
tally a weapon, and propulsion is its essential moment. The weapon
is ballistic; the very notion of the “problem” is related to the war
machine. The more mechanisms of projection a tool has, the more it
behaves like a weapon, potentially or simply metaphorically. In addi-
tion, tools are constantly compensating for the projective mechanisms
they possess, or else they adapt them to other ends. It is true that
missile weapons, in the strict sense, whether projected or projecting,
are only one kind among others; but even handheld weapons require
a usage of the hand and arm different from that required by tools, a
projective usage exemplified in the martial arts. The tool, on the other
hand, is much more introceptive, introjective: it prepares a matter from
a distance, in order to bring it to a state of equilibrium or to appropri-
Proposition VII. Nomad existence has for “affects” the
ate it for a form of interiority. Action at a distance exists in both cases,
weapons of a war machine.

but in one case it is centrifugal and in the other, centripetal. One could
also say that the tool encounters resistances, to be conquered or put to
use, while the weapon has to do with counterattack, to be avoided or
invented (the counterattack is in fact the precipitating and inventive
factor in the war machine, to the extent that it is not simply reducible
A distinction can always be made between weapons and tools on
to a quantitative rivalry or defensive parade).

the basis of their usage (destroying people or producing goods). But
Second, weapons and tools do not “tendentially” (approximately)
although this extrinsic distinction explains certain secondary adapta-
have the same relation to movement, to speed. It is yet another es-
tions of a technical object, it does not preclude a general convertibil-
sential contribution of Paul Virilio to have stressed this weapon-speed
ity between the two groups, to the extent that it seems very difficult
complementarily: the weapon invents speed, or the discovery of speed
to propose an intrinsic difference between weapons and tools. The
invents the weapon (the projective character of weapons is the re-
types of percussion, as defined by Andre Leroi-Gourhan, are found
sult). The war machine releases a vector of speed so specific to it that it
on both sides. “For ages on end agricultural implements and weap-
needs a special name; it is not only the power of destruction, but “dro-
ons of war must have remained identical.”74 Some have spoken of an
mocracy” (= nomas). Among other advantages, this idea articulates a
“ecosystem,” not only situated at the origin, in which work tools and
new mode of distinction between the hunt and war. For it is certain
weapons of war exchange their determinations: it seems that the same
not only that war does not derive from the hunt hut also that the
machinicphylum traverses both. And yet we have the feeling that
hunt does not promote weapons: either war evolved in the sphere
there are many internal differences, even if they are not intrinsic, in
of indistinction and convertibility between weapons and tools, or it
other words, logical or conceptual, and even if they remain approxi-
used to its own advantage weapons already distinguished, already
64
65
 
constituted. As Virilio says, war in no way appears when man ap-
does not generalize the idea of the prey by applying it to the enemy;
plies to man the relation of the hunter to the animal, but on the
he abstracts the idea of the motor, applying it to himself.

contrary when he captures the force of the hunted animal and en-
Two objections immediately arise. According to the first, the war
ters an entirely new relation to man, that of war (enemy, no longer
machine possesses as much weight and gravity as it does speed (the
prey). It is therefore not surprising that the war machine was the in-
distinction between the heavy and the light, the dissymmetry be-
vention of the animal-raising nomads: animal breeding and train-
tween defense and attack, the opposition between rest and tension).

ing are not to be confused either with the primitive hunt or with
But it would be easy to demonstrate that phenomena of “temporiza-
sedentary domestication, but are in fact the discovery of a project-
tion,” and even of immobility and catatonia, so important in wars,
ing and projectile system. Rather than operating by blow-by-blow
relate in certain cases to a component of pure speed. And the rest of
violence, or constituting a violence “once and for all,” the war ma-
the time, they relate to the conditions under which State apparatuses
chine, with breeding and training, institutes an entire economy of
appropriate the war machine, notably by arranging a striated space
violence, in other words, a way of making violence durable, even
where opposing forces can come to an equilibrium. It can happen
unlimited. “Bloodletting, immediate killing, run contrary to the un-
that speed is abstracted as the property of a projectile, a bullet or ar-
limited usage of violence, that is, to its economy.. .. The economy of
tillery shell, which condemns the weapon itself, and the soldier, to
violence is not that of the hunter in the animal raiser, hut that of the
immobility (for example, immobility in the First World War). But
hunted animal. In horseback riding, one conserves the kinetic en-
an equilibrium of forces is a phenomenon of resistance, whereas the
ergy, the speed of the horse, and no longer its proteins (the motor, and
counterattack implies a rush or change of speed that breaks the equi-
no longer the flesh)
Whereas in the hunt the hunter’s aim was to
librium: it was the tank that regrouped all of the operations in the
arrest the movement of wild animality through systematic slaughter,
speed vector and recreated a smooth space for movement by uprooting
the animal breeder [sets about] conserving it, and, by means of train-
men and arms.76
ing, the rider joins with this movement, orienting it and provoking
The opposite objection is more complex: it is that speed does indeed
its acceleration.” The technological motor would develop this tendency
seem to be as much a part of the tool as of the weapon, and is no way
further, but “horseback riding was the first projector of the warrior, his
specific to the war machine. The history of the motor is not only mili-
first system of arms.”75 Whence becoming-animal in the war machine.

tary. But perhaps there is too much of a tendency to think in terms of
Does this mean that the war machine did not exist before horseback
quantities of movement, instead of seeking qualitative models. The two
riding and the cavalry? That is not the issue. The issue is that the war
ideal models of the motor are those of work and free action. Work is a
machine implies the release of a Speed vector that becomes a free or
motor cause that meets resistances, operates upon the exterior, is con-
independent variable; this does not occur in the hunt, where speed
sumed and spent in its effect, and must be renewed from one moment
is associated primarily with the hunted animal. It is possible for this
to the next. Free action is also a motor cause, but one that has no resis-
race vector to be released in an infantry, without recourse to horseback
tance to overcome, operates only upon the mobile body itself, is not
riding; it is possible, moreover, for there to be horseback riding, but
consumed in its effect, and continues from one moment to the next.

as a means of transportation or even of portage having nothing to do
Whatever its measure or degree, speed is relative in the first case, absolute
with the free vector. In any event, what the warrior borrows from the
in the second (the idea of a perpetuum mobile). In work, what counts
animal is more the idea of the motor than the model of the prey. He
is the point of application of a resultant force exerted by the weight of a
66
67
 
body considered as “one” (gravity), and the relative displacement of this
semblage as formal cause of the weapons. And what effectuates the work
point of application. In free action, what counts is the way in which the
model is not the tools but the “work machine” assemblage as formal cause
elements of the body escape gravitation to occupy absolutely a nonpunc-
of the tools. When we say that the weapon is inseparable from a speed vec-
tuated space. Weapons and weapon handling seem to be linked to a free-
tor, while the tool remains tied to conditions of gravity, we are claiming
action model, and tools to a work model. Linear displacement, from one
only to signal a difference between two types of assemblage, a distinc-
point to another, constitutes the relative movement of the tool, but it is
tion that holds even if in the assemblage proper to it the tool is abstractly
the vortical occupation of a space that constitutes the absolute movement
“faster,” and the weapon abstractly “weightier.” The tool is essentially
of the weapon. It is as though the weapon were moving, self-propelling,
tied to a genesis, a displacement, and an expenditure of force whose laws
while the tool is moved. This link between tools and work remains
reside in work, while the weapon concerns only the exercise or manifes-
obscured unless work receives the motor, or real, definition we have just
tation of force in space and time, in conformity with free action. The
given it. The tool does not define work; just the opposite. The tool pre-
weapon does not fall from the sky, and obviously assumes production,
supposes work. It must be added that weapons, also, obviously imply a
displacement, expenditure, and resistance. But this aspect relates to the
renewal of the cause, an expending or even disappearance in the effect,
common sphere of the weapon and the tool, and does not yet concern the
the encountering of external resistances, a displacement of force, etc.

specificity of the weapon, which appears only when force is considered in
It would be futile to credit weapons with a magical power in contrast to
itself, when it is no longer tied to anything but the number, movement,
the constraints of tools: weapons and tools are subject to the same laws,
space, or time, or when speed is added to displacement. Concretely,
which define, precisely, their common sphere. But the principle behind
a weapon as such relates not to the Work model but to the Free-Action
all technology is to demonstrate that a technical element remains ab-
model, with the assumption that the conditions of work are fulfilled
stract, entirely undetermined, as long as one does not relate it to an as-
elsewhere. In short, from the point of view of force, the tool is tied to
semblage it presupposes. It is the machine that is primary in relation
a gravity- displacement, weight-height system, and the weapon to a
to the technical element: not the technical machine, itself a collection
speed-perpetuum mobile system (it is in this sense that it can be said
of elements, but the social or collective machine, the machinic assem-
that speed in itself is a “weapons system”).

blage that determines what is a technical element at a given moment,
The very general primacy of the collective and machinic assemblage
what is its usage, extension, comprehension, etc.

over the technical element applies generally, for tools as for weapons.

It is through the intermediary of assemblages that the phylum se-
Weapons and tools are consequences, nothing but consequences. It has
lects, qualifies, and even invents the technical elements. Thus one
often been remarked that a weapon is nothing outside of the combat
cannot speak of weapons or tools before defining the constituent as-
organization it is bound up with. For example, “hoplite” weapons ex-
semblages they presuppose and enter into. This is what we meant
isted only by virtue of the phalanx as a mutation of the war machine:
when we said that weapons and tools are not merely distinguished
the only new weapon at the time, the two-handled shield, was created
from one another in an extrinsic manner, and yet they have no dis-
by this assemblage; the other weapons were preexistent, but in other
tinctive intrinsic characteristics. They have internal (and not intrinsic)
combinations where they had a different function, a different n a -
characteristics relating to the respective assemblages with which they
t u r e . I t is always the assemblage that constitutes the weapons sys-
are associated. What effectuates a free-action model is not the weapons
tem. The lance and the sword came into bring in the Bronze Age only
in themselves and in their physical aspect but the “war machine” as-
by virtue of the man-horse assemblage, which caused a lengthening of
68
69
 
the dagger and pike, and made the first infantry weapons, the morning
ferent orders. Passions are effectuations of desire that differ according to
star and the battle-ax, obsolete. The stirrup, in turn, occasioned a new
the assemblage: it is not the same justice or the same cruelty, the same
figure of the man-horse assemblage, entailing a new type of lance and
pity, etc. The work regime is inseparable from an organization and a
new weapons; and this man-horse-stirrup constellation is itself variable,
development of Form, corresponding to which is the formation of
and has different effects depending on whether it is bound up with
the subject. This is the passional regime of feeling as “the form of the
the general conditions of nomadism, or later readapted to the seden-
worker.” Feeling implies an evaluation of matter and its resistances,
tary conditions of feudalism. The situation is exactly the same for
a direction (sens, also “meaning”) to form and its developments, an
the tool: once again, everything depends on an organization of work,
economy of force and its displacements, an entire gravity. But the
and variable assemblages of human, animal, and thing. Thus the heavy
regime of the war machine is on the contrary that of affects* which
plow exists as a specific tool only in a constellation where “long open
relate only to the moving body in itself, to speeds and compositions
fields” predominate, where the horse tends to replace the ox as draft
of speed among elements. Affect is the active discharge of emotion,
animal, where the land begins to undergo triennial rotation, and where
the counterattack, whereas feeling is an always displaced, retarded,
the economy becomes communal. Beforehand, the heavy plow may well
resisting emotion. Affects are projectiles just like weapons; feelings are
have existed, but on the margins of other assemblages that did not bring
introceptive like tools. There is a relation between the affect and the
out its specificity, that left unexploited its differential character with the
weapon, as witnessed not only in mythology but also in the chanson
scratch plow.79
degeste, and the chivalric novel or novel of courtly love. Weapons are
Assemblages are passional, they are compositions of desire. Desire has
affects and affects weapons. From this standpoint, the most absolute
nothing to do with a natural or spontaneous determination; there is no
immobility, pure catatonia, is a part of the speed vector, is carried by
desire but assembling, assembled, desire. The rationality, the efficiency,
this vector, which links the petrification of the act to the precipita-
of an assemblage does not exist without the passions the assemblage brings
tion of movement. The knight sleeps on his mount, then departs like
into play, without the desires that constitute it as much as it constitutes
an arrow. Kleist is the author who best integrated these sudden cata-
them. Detienne has shown that the Greek phalanx was inseparable from
tonic fits, swoons, suspenses, with the utmost speeds of a war machine.

a whole reversal of values, and from a passional mutation that drastically
1 le presents us with a becoming-weapon of the technical element si-
changed the relations between desire and the war machine. It is a case
multaneous to a becoming-affect of the passional element (the Penthe-
of man dismounting from the horse, and of the man-animal relation
silea equation). The martial arts have always subordinated weapons to
being replaced by a relation between men in an infantry assemblage that
speed, and above all to mental (absolute) speed; for this reason, they are
paves the way for the advent of the peasant-soldier, the citizen-soldier:
also the arts of suspense and immobility. The affect passes through both
the entire Eros of war changes, a group homosexual Eros tends to re-
extremes. Thus the martial arts do not adhere to a code, as an affair of
place the zoosexual Eros of the horseman. Undoubtedly, whenever a
the State, but follow ways, which are so many paths of the affect; upon
State appropriates the war machine, it tends to assimilate the educa-
these ways, one learns to “unuse” weapons as much as one learns to use
tion of the citizen to the training of the worker to the apprenticeship
them, as if the power and cultivation of the affect were the true goal
of the soldier. But if it is true that all assemblages are assemblages of
of the assemblage, the weapon being only a provisory means. Learning
desire, the question is whether the assemblages of war and work, con-
to undo things, and to undo oneself, is proper to the war machine: the
sidered in themselves, do not fundamentally mobilize passions of dif-
“not-doing” of the warrior, the undoing of the subject. A movement
70
71
 
of decoding runs through the war machine, while overcoding solders
is not that of form-matter but of motif-support, where the earth is no
the tool to an organization of work and of the State (the tool is never
longer anything more than ground (sof), where there is no longer even
unlearned; one can only compensate for its absence). It is true that the
any ground at all because the support is as mobile as the motif. They
martial arts continually invoke the center of gravity and the rules for
lend colors the speed of light, turning gold to red and silver to white
its displacement. That is because these ways are not the ultimate ones.

light. They are attached to the horse’s harness, the sheath of the sword,
However far they go, they are still in the domain of Being, and only
the warrior’s garments, the handle of the weapon; they even decorate
translate absolute movements of another nature into the common
things used only once, such as arrowheads. Regardless of the effort or
space—those effectuated in the Void, not in nothingness, but in the
toil they imply, they are of the order of free action, related to pure
smooth of the void where there is no longer any goal: attacks, counter-
mobility, and not of the order of work with its conditions of gravity,
attacks, and headlong plunges.

resistance, and expenditure. The ambulant smith links metalworking
Still from the standpoint of the assemblage, there is an essential
to the weapon, and vice versa. Gold and silver have taken on many other
relation between tools and signs. That is because the work model that
functions but cannot be understood apart from this nomadic contri-
defines the tool belongs to the State apparatus. It has often been said
bution made by the war machine, in which they are not matters but
that people in primitive societies do not, strictly speaking, work, even
traits of expression appropriate to weapons (the whole mythology of
if their activities are very constrained and regulated; and the man
war not only subsists in money but is the active factor in it). Jewels are
of war. in his capacity as a man of war, does not work either (the
the affects corresponding to weapons, that are swept up by the same
“labors” of Hercules assume submission to a king). The technical
speed vector.

element becomes a tool when it is abstracted from the territory and
Metalworking, jewelry making, ornamentation, even decoration,
is applied to the earth as an object; but at the same time, the sign
do not form a writing, even though they have a power of abstraction that
ceases to be inscribed upon the body and is written upon an immo-
is in every way equal to that of writing. But this power is assembled dif-
bile, objective matter. For there to be work, there must be a capture
ferently. In the case of writing, the nomads had no need to create their
of activity by the State apparatus, and a semiotization of activity
they borrowed that of their sedentary imperial neighbors, who even
by writing. Hence the affinity between the assemblages signs-tools,
furnished them with a phonetic transcription of their languages.81
and signs of writing-organization of work. Entirely different is the
“The goldsmith’s and silversmith’s is the barbarian art par excellence;
case of the weapon, winch is in an essential relation with jewelry. Jew-
filigree and gold and silver plating. . . . Scythian art, tied as it was to a
elry has undergone so many secondary adaptations that we no longer
nomadic and warlike economy that both used and repudiated a com-
have a clear understanding of what it is. But something lights up in
merce reserved for foreigners, now moved toward this luxurious and
our mind when we are told that metalworking was the “barbarian,”
decorative type of work. The barbarians ... did not need to possess
or nomad, art par excellence, and when we see these masterpieces of
or create a precise code, such as for instance an elementary pictoideo-
minor art. These fibulas, these gold or silver plaques, these pieces of
graphic one—still less a syllabic writing of their own, which would
jewelry, are attached to small movable objects; they are not only easy
indeed have had to compete with the ones in use among their more
to transport, but pertain to the object only as object in motion. These
advanced neighbors. Toward the fourth and third centuries B.C. the
plaques constitute traits of expression of pure speed, carried on objects
Scythian art of the Black Sea region thus tends naturally toward a
that are themselves mobile and moving. The relation between them
graphic schematization of its forms, which makes them more of a
72
73
 
linear ornamentation than a proto-writing.”82 Of course, one may
for a worker, industrial or agricultural, to reinvent a war machine.

write on jewelry, metal plaques, or even weapons, but only in the
Peasants made an important contribution to the history of artillery
sense that one applies a preexisting writing system to these matters.

during the Hussite wars, when Zilka armed mobile fortresses made
The case of runic writing is more troubling because its origins seem
from oxcarts with portable cannons. A worker-soldier, weapon-tool,
exclusively tied to jewelry, fibulas, elements of metalworking, small
sentiment-affect affinity marks the right time, however fleeting, for
movable objects. The point is that in its early period runic writing
revolutions and popular wars. There is a schizophrenic taste for the tool
had only a weak communication value and a very restricted public
that moves it away from work and toward free action, a schizophrenic
function. Its secret character has led many to interpret it as magical
taste for the weapon that turns it into a means for peace, for obtaining
writing. Rather, it is an affective semiotic, comprising in particular:
peace. A counterattack and a resistance simultaneously. Everything
(1) signatures, as marks of possession or fabrication, and (2) short war
is ambiguous. But we do not believe that Ernst Junger’s analyses are
or love messages. It constitutes a text that is “ornamental” rather than
disqualified by this ambiguity when he portrays the “Rebel” as a
scriptural, “an invention with little utility, half-aborted,” a substitute
transhistorical figure drawing the Worker, on the one hand, and the
writing. It only takes on the value of writing during a second period,
Soldier, on the other, down a shared line of flight where one says si-
when monumental inscriptions appear, with the Danish reform of the
multaneously “I seek a weapon” and “1 am looking for a tool”: Draw
ninth century A.D., in connection with the State and work.8*
the line, or what amounts to the same thing, cross the line, pass over
It may be objected that tools, weapons, signs, and jewelry in fact
the line, for the line is only drawn by surpassing the line of separa-
occur everywhere, in a common sphere. But that is not the problem,
tion/’ Undoubtedly, nothing is more outmoded than the man of war:
any more than it is to seek an origin in each case. It is a question of
he has long since been transformed into an entirely different character,
assigning assemblages, in other words, of determining the differential
the military man. And the worker himself has undergone so many
trails according to which an element formally belongs to one assem-
misadventures. . . And yet men of war reappear, with many ambigui-
blage rather than to another. It could also be said that architecture
ties: they are all those who know the uselessness of violence but who are
and cooking have an apparent affinity with the State, whereas music
adjacent to a war machine to be recreated, one of active, revolutionary
and drugs have differential traits that place them on the side of the
counterattacks. Workers also reappear who do not believe in work but
nomadic war machine.84 It is therefore a differential method that
who are adjacent to a work machine to be recreated, one of active re-
establishes the distinction between weapons and tools, from at least
sistance and technological liberation. They do not resuscitate old myths
five points of view: the direction (sens) (projection- introception), the
or archaic figures; they are the new figures of a transhistorical assemblage
vector (speed-gravity), the model (free action-work), the expression
(neither historical nor eternal, but untimely): the nomad warrior and
(jewelry-signs), and the passional or desiring tonality (affect- feel-
the ambulant worker. A somber caricature already precedes them, the
ing). Doubtless the State apparatus tends to bring uniformity to the
mercenary or mobile military adviser, and the technocrat or transhu-
regimes, by disciplining its armies, by making work a fundamental
mant analyst, CIA and IBM. But transhistorical figures must defend
unit, in other words, by imposing its own traits. But it is not impos-
themselves as much against old myths as against preestablished, antic-
sible for weapons and tools, if they are taken up by new assemblages of
ipatory disfigurations. “One does not go back to reconquer the myth,
metamorphosis, to enter other relations of alliance. The man of war
one encounters it anew, when time quakes at its foundations under the
may at times form peasant or worker alliances, but it is more frequent
empire of extreme danger.” Martial arts and state-of-the-art technologies
74
75
 
have value only because they create the possibility of bringing together
worker and warrior masses of a new type. The shared line of flight of the
weapon and the tool: a pure possibility, a mutation. There arise subter-
ranean, aerial, submarine technicians who belong more or less to the
world order, but who involuntarily invent and amass virtual charges
of knowledge and action that are usable by others, minute but easily
acquired for new assemblages. The borrowings between warfare and the
military apparatus, work and free action, always run in both directions,
for a struggle that is all the more varied.

Problem III. How do the nomads invent or find their
weapons?

P roposition VIII. Metallurgy in itself constitutes a flow
necessarily confluent w i t h nomadism.

The political, economic, and social regime of the peoples of the
steppe are less well known than their innovations in war, in the ar-
eas of offensive and defensive weapons, composition or strategy, and
technological elements (the saddle, stirrup, horseshoe, harness, etc.).

History contests each innovation but cannot succeed in effacing the
nomad traces. What the nomads invented was the man-animal-weap-
on, man-horse-bow assemblage, Through this assemblage of speed,
the ages of metal are marked by innovation. The socketed bronze
battle-ax of the Hyksos and the iron sword of the Hittites have been
compared to miniature atomic bombs. It has been possible to estab-
lish a rather precise periodization of the weapons of the steppe, show-
ing the alternation between heavy and light armament (the Scythian
76
77
 
type and the Sarmatian type), and their mixed forms. The cast steel
the facts already speak sufficiently in favor of an imperial origin, the
saber, often short and curved, a weapon for side attack with the edge
best of the commentators finds it fitting to add that the Scythians
of the blade, envelops a different dynamic space than the forged iron
could not have invented it at any rate—poor nomads that they were—
sword used for frontal attack with the point: it was the Scythians who
and that crucible steel necessarily came from a sedentary milieu. But
brought it to India and Persia, where the Arabs would later acquire
why follow the very old, official Chinese version according to which
it. It is commonly agreed that the nomads lost their role as innovators
deserters from the imperial army revealed the secrets to the Scyth-
with the advent of firearms, in particular the cannon (“gunpowder
ians? And what can “revealing the secret” mean if the Scythians were
overtook them”). But it was not necessarily because they did not know
incapable of putting it to use, and understood nothing of all that?

how to use them. Not only did armies like the Turkish army, whose
Blame the deserters, why don’t you. You don’t make an atomic bomb
nomadic traditions remained strong, develop extensive firepower, a
with a secret, any more than you make a saber if you are incapable of
new space, but additionally, and even more characteristically, light ar-
reproducing it, and of integrating it under different conditions, of
tillery was thoroughly integrated into mobile formations of wagons,
transferring it to other assemblages. Propagation and diffusion are fully
pirate ships, etc. If the cannon marks a limit for the nomads, it is on
a part of the line of innovation; they mark a bend in it. On top of that,
the contrary because it implies an economic investment that only a
why say that crucible steel is necessarily the property of sedentaries or
State apparatus can make (even commercial cities do not suffice). The
imperial subjects, when it is first of all the invention of metallurgists? It
fact remains that for weapons other than firearms, and even for the can-
is assumed that these metallurgists were necessarily controlled by a State
non, there is always a nomad on the horizon of a given technological
apparatus; but they also had to enjoy a certain technological autonomy,


lineage.

and social clandestinity, so that, even controlled, they did not belong to
Obviously, each case is controversial, as demonstrated by the de-
the State any more than they were themselves nomads. There were no
bates on the stirrup.7 The problem is that it is generally difficult to
deserters who betrayed the secret, but rather metallurgists who com-
distinguish between what comes from the nomads as such, and what
municated it and made its adaptation and propagation possible: an en-
they receive from the empire they communicate with, conquer, or in-
tirely different kind of “betrayal.” In the last analysis, what makes the
tegrate with. There are so many gray areas, intermediaries, and com-
discussions so difficult (both in the controversial case of the stirrup and
binations between an imperial army and a nomad war machine that
in the definite case of the saber) are not only the prejudices about the
it is often the case that things originate in the empire. The example
nomads but also the absence of a sufficiently elaborated concept of the
of the saber is typical, and unlike the stirrup, there is no longer any
technological lineage (what defines a technological line or continuum,
doubt. Although it is true that the Scythians were the propagators
and its variable extension, from a given standpoint?).

of the saber, introducing it to the Hindus, Persians, and Arabs, they
It would be useless to say that metallurgy is a science because it dis-
were also its first victims, they started off on the receiving end; it was
covers constant laws, for example, the melting point of a metal at all
invented by the Chinese empire of the Oin and Han dynasties.

times and in all places. For metallurgy is inseparable from several lines
The exclusive master of steel casting or crucible steel.** This is a
of variation: variation between meteorites and indigenous metals; varia-
good example to illustrate the difficulties facing modern archaeolo-
tion between ores and proportions of metal; variation between alloys,
gists and historians. Even archaeologists are not immune from a cer-
natural and artificial; variation between the operations performed upon a
tain hatred or contempt for the nomads. In the case of the saber, where
metal; variation between the qualities that make a given operation pos-
78
79
 
sible, or that result from a given operation (for example, twelve varieties
single machinic phylum, ideally continuous: the flow of matter-move-
of copper identified and inventoried at Sumer by place of origin and de-
ment, the flow of matter in continuous variation, conveying singulari-
gree of refinement). All of these variables can be grouped under two overall
ties and traits of expression. This operative and expressive flow is as
rubrics: singularities or spatiotempora! haecceities of different orders,
much artificial as natural: it is like the unity of human beings and
and the operations associated with them as processes of deformation
Nature. But at the same time, it is not realized in the here and now
or transformation; affective qualities or trails of expression of differ-
without dividing, differentiating. We will call an assemblage every
ent levels, corresponding to these singularities and operations (hard-
constellation of singularities and traits deducted from the How—se-
ness, weight, color, etc.). Let us return to the example of the saber,
lected, organized, stratified—in such a way as to converge (consistency)
or rather of crucible steel. It implies the actualization of a first sin-
artificially and naturally; an assemblage, in this sense, is a veritable
gularity, namely, the melting of the iron at high temperature; then
invention. Assemblages may group themselves into extremely vast
a second singularity, the successive decarbonations; corresponding to
constellations constituting “cultures,” or even “ages”; within these
these singularities are traits of expression—not only the hardness,
constellations, the assemblages still differentiate the phyla or the flow,
sharpness, and finish, but also the undulations or designs traced
dividing it into so many different phylas, of a given order, on a given
by the crystallization and resulting from the internal structure of
level, and introducing selective discontinuities in the ideal continu-
the cast steel. The iron sword is associated with entirely different sin-
ity of matter-movement. The assemblages cut the phylum up into dis-
gularities because it is forged and not cast or molded, quenched and
tinct, differentiated lineages, at the same time as the machinic phylum
not air cooled, produced by the piece and not in number; its traits of
cuts across them all, taking leave of one to pick up again in another, or
expression are necessarily very different because it pierces rather than
making them coexist. A certain singularity embedded in the flanks of
hews, attacks from the front rather than from the side; even the ex-
the phylum, for example, the chemistry of carbon, will be brought
pressive designs are obtained in an entirely different way, by inlay.We
up to the surface by a given assemblage that selects, organizes, in-
may speak of a machinic phylum, or technological lineage, wherever
vents it, and through which all or part of the phylum passes, at a
we find a constellation of singularities, prolongable by certain op-
given place at a given time. We may distinguish in every case a num-
erations, which converge, and make the operations converge, upon
ber of very different lines. Some of them, phylogenetic lines, travel
one or several assignable traits of expression. If the singularities or
long distances between assemblages of various ages and cultures (from
operations diverge, in different materials or in the same material, we
the blowgun to the cannon? from the prayer wheel to the propeller?

must distinguish two different phyla: this is precisely the case for the
from the pot to the motor?); others, ontogenetic lines, are internal to
iron sword, descended from the dagger, and the steel saber, descended
one assemblage and link up its various elements, or else cause one
from the knife. Each phylum has its own singularities and operations,
element to pass, often after a delay, into another assemblage of a dif-
its own qualities and traits, which determine the relation of desire to
ferent nature but of the same culture or age (for example, the horse-
the technical element (the affects the saber “has” are not the same as
shoe, which spread through agricultural assemblages). It is thus neces-
those of the sword).

sary to take into account the selective action of the assemblages upon the
But it is always possible to situate the analysis on the level of singu-
phylum, and the evolutionary reaction of the phylum as the subter-
larities that are prolongable from one phylum to another, and to tie the
ranean thread that passes from one assemblage to another, or quits an
two phyla together. At the limit, there is a single phyiogenetic lineage, a
assemblage, draws it forward and opens it up. Vital impulse! Leroi-
80
81
 
Gourhan has gone the farthest toward a technological vitalism taking
roundness a schematic or vague essence, intermediary between
biological evolution in general as the model for technical evolution; a
rounded sensible things and the conceptual essence of the circle’?

Universal Tendency, laden with all of the singularities and traits of
In effect, roundness exists only as a threshold-affect (neither flat
expression, traverses technical and interior milieus that refract or dif-
nor pointed) and as a limit-process (becoming rounded), through
ferentiate it in accordance with the singularities and traits each of them
sensible things and technical agents, millstone, lathe, wheel, spin-
retains, selects, draws together, causes to converge, invents. There is indeed a
ning wheel, socket, etc. But it is only “intermediary” to the extent
machinic phylum in variation that creates the technical assemblages,
that what is intermediary is autonomous, initially stretching it-
whereas the assemblages invent the various phyla. A technological lin-
self between things, and between thoughts, to establish a whole new
eage changes significantly according to whether one draws it upon the
relation between thoughts and things, a vague identity between the
phylum or inscribes it in the assemblages; but the two are inseparable.

two.

So how are we to define this matter-movement, this matter-energy,
Certain distinctions proposed by Simondon can be compared to
this matter-flow, this matter in variation that enters assemblages and
those of Husserl. For Simondon exposes the technological insufficiency
leaves them? It is a destratified, deterritorialized matter. It seems to us
of the matter-form model, in that it assumes a fixed form and a matter
that Husserl brought thought a decisive step forward when he discov-
deemed homogeneous. It is the idea of the law that assures the model’s
ered a region of vague and material essences (in other words, essences
coherence, since laws are what submit matter to this or that form,
that are vagabond, anexact and yet rigorous), distinguishing them from
and, conversely! realize in matter a given property deduced from the
fixed, metric and formal, essences. We have seen that these vague essenc-
form. But Simondon demonstrates that the hylomorphic model leaves
es are as distinct from formed things as they are from formal essences.

many things, active and affective, by the wayside. On the one hand, to
They constitute fuzzy aggregates. They relate to a corporeality (mate-
the formed or formable matter we must add an entire energetic ma-
riality) that is not to be confused either with an intelligible, formal
teriality in movement, carrying singularities or haecceities that are
essentiality or a sensible, formed and perceived, thinghood. This cor-
already like implicit forms that are topological, rather than geometri-
poreality has two characteristics: on the one hand, it is inseparable from
cal, and that combine with processes of deformation: for example, the
passages to the limit as changes of state, from processes of deformation
variable undulations and torsions of the fibers guiding the operation
or transformation operate in a space-time itself anexact and that act in
of splitting wood. On the other hand, to the essential properties of
the manner of events (ablation, adjunction, projection . . .); on the oth-
the matter deriving from the formal essence we must add variable
er hand, it is inseparable from expressive or intensive qualities, which
intensive affects, now resulting from the operation, now on the con-
can be higher or lower in degree, and are produced in the manner of
trary making it possible: for example, wood that is more or less porous,
variable affects (resistance, hardness, weight, color. . .). I here is thus
more or less elastic and resistant. At any rate, it is a question of sur-
an ambulant coupling, events- affects, which constitutes the
rendering to the wood, then following where it leads by connecting
vague corporeal essence and is distinct from the sedentary linkage,
operations to a materiality, instead of imposing a form upon a matter:
“fixed essence-properties of the thing deriving from the essence.”
what one addresses is less a matter submitted to laws than a material-
Doubtless Husserl had a tendency to make the vague essence a kind
ity possessing a nomas. One addresses less a form capable of imposing
of intermediary between the essence and the sensible, between the
properties upon a matter than material traits of expression constituting
thing and the concept, a little like the Kantian schema. Is not
affects. Of course, it is always possible to “translate” into a model that
82
83
 
which escapes the model; thus, one may link the materiality’s power
and artisans already mutilates artisans in order to make “workers” of
of variation to laws adapting a fixed form and a constant matter to one
them. We will therefore define the artisan as one who is determined
another. But this cannot be done without a distortion that consists
in such a way as to follow a How of matter, a machinic phylum. The
in uprooting variables from their state of continuous variation, in
artisan is the itinerant, the ambulant. To follow the flow of matter is
order to extract from them fixed points and constant relations. Thus
to itinerate, to ambulate. It is intuition in action. Of course, there are
one throws the variables off, even changing the nature of the equa-
second-order itinerancies where it is no longer a flow of matter that
tions, which cease to be immanent to matter-movement (inequa-
one prospects and follows, but, for example, a market. Nevertheless, it
tions, adequations). The question is not whether such a translation is
is always a flow that is followed, even if the now is not always that of
conceptually legitimate—it is—but what intuition gets lost in it. In
matter. And, above all, there are secondary itinerancies, which derive
short, what Simondon criticizes the hyiomorphic model for is taking
from another “condition,” even if they are necessarily entailed by it.

form and matter to be two terms defined separately, like the ends
For example, a transhumant, whether a farmer or an animal raiser,
of two halt- chains whose connection can no longer be seen, like a
changes land after it is worn out, or else seasonally; but transhumants
simple relation of molding behind which there is a perpetually vari-
only secondarily follow a land flow, because they undertake a rotation
able, continuous modulation that it is no longer possible to grasp/-
meant from the start to return them to the point from which they
The critique of the hyiomorphic schema is based on “the existence,
left, after the forest has regenerated, the land has rested, the weather
between form and matter, of a zone of medium and intermediary
has changed. Transhumants do not follow a flow, they draw a circuit;
dimension,” of energetic, molecular dimension—a space unto itself
they only follow the part of the flow that enters into the circuit,
that deploys its materiality through matter, a number unto itself
even an ever-widening one. Transhumants are therefore itinerant
that propels its traits through form.

only consequentially, or become itinerant only when their circuit
We always get back to this definition: the machinic phylum is ma-
of land or pasture has been exhausted, or when the rotation has be-
teriality, natural or artificial, and both simultaneously, it is matter in
come so wide that the Hows escape the circuit. Even the merchant
movement, in flux, in variation, m a t t e r a s a conveyor of singulari-
is a transhumant, to the extent that mercantile Hows are subor-
ties and traits of expression. This has obvious consequences: namely,
dinated to the rotation between a point of departure and a point of
this matter- now can only be followed. Doubtless, the operation that
arrival (go get-bring back, import-export, buy-sell). Whatever the
consists in following can be carried out in one place: an artisan who
reciprocal implications, there are considerable differences between a
planes follows the wood, the fibers of the wood, without changing lo-
flow and a circuit. The migrant, we have seen, is something else
cation. But this way of following is only one particular sequence in a
again. And the nomads not primarily defined as an itinerant or as
more general process. For artisans arc obliged to follow in another way
a transhumant, nor as a migrant, even though nomads become these
as well, in other words, to go find the wood where it lies, and to find
consequentially. The primary determination of nomads is to occupy
the wood with the right kind of fibers. Otherwise, they must have it
and hold a smooth space: it is this aspect that determines them as
brought to them: it is only because merchants take care of one seg-
nomad (essence). On their own account, they will be transhumants,
ment of the journey in reverse that the artisans can avoid making the
or itinerants, only by virtue of the imperatives imposed by the
trip themselves. But artisans are complete only if they are also pros-
smooth spaces. In short, whatever the de facto mixes between nomad-
pectors; and the organization that separates prospectors, merchants,
ism, itinerancy, and transhumance, the primary concept is different
84
85
 
in the three cases (smooth space, matter-How, rotation). It is only on
of a materiality in relation to a prepared matter, and of a transfor-
the basis of the distinct concept that we can make a judgment on the
mation in relation to the form to be incarnated. Matter and form
mix—on when it is produced, on the form in which it is produced, and
have never seemed more rigid than in metallurgy; yet the succession
on the order in which it is produced.

of forms tends to be replaced by the form of a continuous develop-
But in the course of the preceding discussion, we have wandered
ment, and the variability of matters tends to be replaced by the mat-
from the question: Why is the machinit-phylum, the flow of mat-
ter of a continuous variation. If metallurgy has an essential relation
ter, essentially metallic or metallurgical? Here again, it is only the
with music, it is by virtue not only of the sounds of the forge but
distinct concept that can give us an answer, in that it shows that there
also of the tendency within both arts to bring into its own, beyond
is a special, primary relation between itinerance and metallurgy (de-
separate forms, a continuous development of form, and beyond vari-
territorialization). However, the examples we took from Husserl and
able matters, a continuous variation of matter: a widened chromati-
Simondon concerned wood and clay as well as metals. Besides, are there
cism sustains both music and metallurgy; the musical smith was the
not Hows of grass, water, herds, which form so many phyla or matters
first “transformer.” In short, what metal and metallurgy bring to light is
in movement? It is easier for us to answer these questions now. For it
a life proper to matter, a vital state of matter as such, a material vitalism
is as if metal and metallurgy imposed upon and raised to consciousness
that doubtless exists everywhere but is ordinarily hidden or covered,
something that is only hidden or buried in the other matters and op-
rendered unrecognizable, dissociated by the hyiomorphic model. Metal-
erations. The difference is that elsewhere the operations occur between
lurgy is the consciousness or thought of the matter-flow, and metal the
two thresholds, one of which constitutes the matter prepared for the
correlate of this consciousness. As expressed in panmetallism, metal is
operation, and the other the form to be incarnated (for example, the
coextensive to the whole of matter, and the whole of matter to metal-
clay and the mold). The hylomorphic model derives its general value
lurgy. Even the waters, the grasses and varieties of wood, the animals
from this, since the incarnated form that marks the end of an op-
are populated by salts or mineral elements. Not everything is metal, but
eration can serve as the matter for a new operation, but in a fixed
metal is everywhere. Metal is the conductor of all matter. The machinic
order marking a succession of thresholds. In metallurgy, on the other
phylum is metallurgical, or at least has a metallic head, as its itinerant
hand, the operations are always astride the thresholds, so that an
probe-head or guidance device. And thought is born more from metal
energetic materiality overspills the prepared matter, and a qualita-
than from stone: metallurgy is minor science in person, “vague” science
tive deformation or transformation overspills the form. For example,
or the phenomenology of matter. The prodigious idea of Nonorganic
quenching follows forging and takes place after the form has been fixed.

Life—the very same idea Worringer considered the barbarian idea par ex-
Or, to take another example, in molding, the metallurgist in a sense
cellence—was the invention, the intuition of metallurgy. Metal is nei-
works inside the mold. Or again, steel that is melted and molded later
ther a thing nor an organism, but a body without organs. The “North-
undergoes a series of successive decarbonations. Finally, metallurgy
ern, or Gothic, line” is above all a mining or metallic line delimiting
has the option of melting down and reusing a matter to which it
this body. The relation between metallurgy and alchemy reposes not, as
gives an ingot-form: the history of metal is inseparable from this very
Jung believed, on the symbolic value of metal and its correspondence
particular form, which is not to be confused with either a stock or a
with an organic soul but on the immanent power of corporeality in all
commodity; monetary value derives from it. More generally, the
matter, and on the esprit de corps accompanying it.

metallurgical idea of the “reducer” expresses this double liberation
The first and primary itinerant is the artisan. But artisans are nei-
86
87
 
ther hunters, farmers, nor animal raisers. Neither arc they winnowers
outside, in which very different peoples confront one another, or else
or potters, who only secondarily take up craft activity. Rather, artisans
reach some accommodation on particular aspects of the control of mines
are those who follow the matter-How as pure productivity: therefore
(extraction, charcoal, workshops, transportation). It is not enough to
in mineral form, and not in vegetable or animal form. They are not
say that there are wars and mining expeditions; or to invoke “a Eur-
of the land, or of the soil, but of the subsoil. Because metal is
asian synthesis of the nomadic workshops from the approaches of Chi-
the pure productivity of matter, those who follow metal are produc-
na to the tip of Britanny,” and remark that “the nomadic popula-
ers of objects par excellence. As demonstrated by V. Gordon Childe,
tions had been in contact with the principal metallurgical centers of
the metallurgist is the first specialized artisan, and in this respect
the ancient world since prehistoric times.” What is needed is a better
forms a collective body (secret societies, guilds, journeymen’s associa-
knowledge of the nomads’ relations with these centers, with the smiths
tions). Artisans-metallurgists are itinerants because they follow the
they themselves employed or frequented, with properly metallurgical
matter-flow of the subsoil. Of course metallurgists have relations
peoples or groups who were their neighbors. What was the situation in
with “the others,” those of the soil, land, and sky. They have rela-
the Caucasus and in the Altai? In Spain and North Africa? Mines are
tions with the farmers of the sedentary communities, and with the
a source of How, mixture, and escape with few equivalents in history.

celestial functionaries of the empire who overcode those communi-
Even when they are well controlled by an empire that owns them (as
ties; in fact, they need them to survive, they depend on an imperial
in the Chinese and Roman empires), there is a major movement of
agricultural stockpile for their very sustenance.” But in their work,
clandestine exploitation, and of miners’ alliances either with no-
they have relations with the forest dwellers, and partially depend on
mad and barbarian incursions or peasant revolts. The study of myths,
them: they must establish their workshops near the forest in order to
and even ethnographic considerations on the status of smiths, di-
obtain the necessary charcoal. In their space, they have relations with
vert us from these political Questions. Mythology and ethnology do
the nomads, since the subsoil unites the ground (sol) of smooth space
not have the right method in this regard. It is too often asked how the
and the land of striated space: there are no mines in the alluvial val-
others “react” to the smith, and as a result, one succumbs to the usual
leys of the empire-dominated farmers; it is necessary to cross deserts,
platitudes about the ambivalence of feelings; it is said that the smith
approach the mountains; and the question of control over the mines
is simultaneously honored, feared, and scorned—more or less scorned
always involves nomadic peoples. Every mine is a line of flight that
among the nomads, more or less honored among the sedentaries. But
is in communication with smooth spaces—there are parallels today in
this loses sight of the reasons for this situation, of the specificity of
the problems with oil.

the smiths themselves, of the nonsymmetrical relation they entertain
Archaeology and history remain strangely silent on this question
with the nomads and the sedentaries. the type of affects they invent
of the control over the mines. There have been empires with a strong
(metallic affect). Before looking at the feelings of others toward smiths,
metallurgical organization that had no mines; the Near East lacked tin,
it is necessary to evaluate the smiths themselves as Other; as such, they
so necessary for the fabrication of bronze. Large quantities of metal ar-
have different affective relations with the sedentaries and the nomads.

rived in ingot form, and from very far away (for instance, tin from Spain
There are no nomadic or sedentary smiths. Smiths are ambulant,
or even from Cornwall). So complex a situation implies not only a
itinerant. Particularly important in this respect is the way in which
strong imperial bureaucracy and elaborate long-distance commercial
smiths live: their space is neither the striated space of the sedentary nor
circuits; it also implies a shifting politics, in which States confront an
the smooth space of the nomad. Smiths may have a tent, they may have
88
89
 
a house; they inhabit them in the manner of an “ore bed” (gite, shelter,
brachycephalics who mix and spread across all of Europe. Are they the
home, mineral deposit), like metal itself, in the manner of a cave or a hole,
ones who kept up the mines, boring holes in European space from every
a hut half or all underground. They are cave dwellers not by nature but
direction, constituting our European space?

by artistry and need.” A splendid text by Elie Faure evokes the infernal
Smiths are not nomadic among the nomads and sedentary among
progress of the itinerant peoples of India as they bore holes in space
the sedentaries, nor half-nomadic among the nomads, half-sedentary
and create the fantastic forms corresponding to these breakthroughs,
among sedentaries. Their relation to others results from their internal
the vital forms of nonorganic life: “There at the shore of the sea, at the
itinerancy, from their vague essence, and not the reverse. It is in their
base of a mountain, they encountered a great wall of granite. Then they
specificity, it is by virtue of their itinerancy, by virtue of their in-
all entered the granite; in its shadows they lived, loved, worked, died,
venting a holey space, that they necessarily communicate with the
were born, and, three or four centuries afterward, they came out again,
sedentaries and with the nomads (and with others besides, with the
leagues away, having traversed the mountain. Behind them they left
transhumant forest dwellers). They are in themselves double: a hy-
the emptied rock, its galleries hollowed out in every direction, its sculp-
brid, an alloy, a twin formation. As Griaule says, Dogon smiths are
tured, chiseled walls, its natural or artificial pillars turned into a deep
not “impure” but “mixed,” and it is because they are mixed that they
lacework with ten thousand horrible or charming figures.. . . Here man
are endogamous, that they do not intermarry with the pure, who
confesses unresistingly his strength and his nothingness. He does not
have a simplified progeny while they reconstitute a twin progeny.,u2
exact the affirmation of a determined ideal from form.... He extracts
Childe demonstrates that metallurgists are necessarily doubled, that
it rough from formlessness, according to the dictates of the formless. He
they exist two times, once as captured by and maintained within
utilizes the indentations and accidents of the rock.”Metallurgical India.

the apparatus of the oriental empire, again in the Aegean world, where
Transpierce the mountains instead of scaling them, excavate the land
they were much more mobile and much freer. But the two segments
instead of striating it, bore holes in space instead of keeping it smooth,
cannot be separated, simply by relating each of them to their par-
turn the earth into swiss cheese. An image from the Film Strike [by
ticular context. The metallurgist belonging to an empire, the worker,
Eisenstein] presents a holey space where a disturbing group of people are
presupposes a metallurgist-prospector, however far away; and the pros-
rising, each emerging from his or her hole as if from a field mined in all
pector ties in with a merchant, who brings the metal to the first metal-
directions. The sign of Cain is the corporeal and affective sign of the sub-
lurgist. In addition, the metal is worked on by each segment, and the
soil, passing through both the striated land of sedentary space and the
ingot-form is common to them all: we must imagine less separate seg-
nomadic ground (sol) of smooth space without stopping at either one,
ments than a chain of mobile workshops constituting, from hole to
the vagabond sign of itinerancy, the double theft and double betrayal
hole, a line of variation, a gallery. Thus the metallurgists’ relation to the
of the metallurgist, who shuns agriculture at the same time as animal
nomads and the sedentaries also passes through the relations they have
raising. Must we reserve the name Cainite for these metallurgical peoples
with other metallurgists. This hybrid metallurgist, a weapon- and tool-
who haunt the depths of History? Prehistoric Europe was crisscrossed
maker, communicates with the sedentaries and with the nomads at the
by the battle-ax people, who came in off the steppes like a detached
same time. Holey space itself communicates with smooth space and stri-
metallic branch of the nomads, and the people known for their bell-
ated space. In effect, the machinic phylum or the metallic line passes
shaped pottery, the beaker people, originating in Andalusia, a detached
through all of the assemblages: nothing is more deterritorialized than
branch of mega-lithic agriculture. Strange peoples, dolicocephalics and
matter-movement. But it is not at all in the same way, and the two com-
90
91
  
munications are not symmetrical. Worringer, in the domain of aesthet-
ics, said that the abstract line took on two quite different expressions,
one in barbarian Gothic art, the other in the organic classical art. Here,
we would say that the phylum simultaneously has two different modes
of liaison: it is always connected to nomad space, whereas it conjugates
with sedentary space. On the side of the nomadic assemblages and war
machines, it is a kind of rhizome, with its gaps, detours, subterranean
passages, stems, openings, traits, holes, etc. On the other side, the seden-
tary assemblages and State apparatuses effect a capture of the phylum, put
the traits of expression into a form or a code, make the holes resonate
together, plug the lines of flight, subordinate the technological operation
to the work model, impose upon the connections a whole regime of ar-
borescent conjunctions.

AXIOM III. The nomad war machine is t h e form of ex-
pression, of which itinerant metallurgy is t h e correlative
form of content.

Proposition IX. War does not necessarily have the
battle as its object, and more important, the war ma-
chine does not necessarily have war as its object, al-
though war and the battle may be its necessary result
(under certain conditions).

We now come to three successive problems. First, is the battle the
“object” of war? But also, is war the “object” of the war machine? And
finally, to what extent is the war machine the “object” of the State
apparatus? The ambiguity of the first two problems is certainly due
to the term “object,” but implies their dependency on the third. We
must nevertheless approach these problems gradually, even if we are
reduced to multiplying examples. The first question, that of the battle,
requires an immediate distinction to be made between two cases: when
92
93
 
a battle is sought, and when it is essentially avoided by the war ma-
war machine has as its enemy the State, the city, the state and urban
chine. These two cases in no way coincide with the offensive and the
phenomenon, and adopts as its objective their annihilation. It is at
defensive. But war in the strict sense (according to a conception of
this point that the war machine becomes war: annihilate the forces of
it that culminated in Foch) does seem to have the battle as its object,
the State, destroy the State-form. The Attila, or Genghis Khan, ad-
whereas guerrilla warfare explicitly aims for the nonbattle. However,
venture clearly illustrates this progression from the positive object to
the development of war into the war of movement, and into total war,
the negative object. Speaking like Aristotle, we would say that war is
also places the notion of the battle in question, as much from the offen-
neither the condition nor the object of the war machine, but neces-
sive as the defensive points of view: the concept of the nonbattle seems
sarily accompanies or completes it; speaking like Derrida, we would
capable of expressing the speed of a flash attack, and the counterspeed
say that war is the “supplement” of the war machine. It may even hap-
of an immediate response.104 Conversely, the development of guerilla
pen that this supplementary is comprehended through a progressive,
warfare implies a moment when, and forms under which, a battle must
anxiety-ridden revelation. Such, for example, was the adventure of
be effectively sought, in connection with exterior and interior “sup-
Moses: leaving the Egyptian State behind, launching into the desert,
port points.” And it is true that guerrilla warfare and war proper are
he begins by forming a war machine, on the inspiration of the old
constantly borrowing each other’s methods and that the borrowings
past of the nomadic Hebrews and on the advice of his father-in-law,
run equally in both directions (for example, stress has often been laid
who came from the nomads. This is the machine of the Just, already
on the inspirations land-based guerrilla warfare received from mari-
a war machine, but one that does not yet have war as its object. Moses
time war). All we can say is that the battle and the nonbattle are the
realizes, little by little, in stages, that war is the necessary supplement
double object of war, according to a criterion that does not coincide
of that machine, because it encounters or must cross cities and States,
with the offensive and the defensive, or even with war proper and
because it must send ahead spies {armed observation), then perhaps
guerrilla warfare.

take things to extremes (war of annihilation). Then the Jewish people
That is why we push the question further back, asking if war itself
experience doubt, and fear that they are not strong enough; but Moses
is the object of the war machine. It is not at all obvious. To the
also doubts, he shrinks before the revelation of this supplement. And
extent that war (with or without the battle) aims tor the annihi-
it will be Joshua, not Moses, who is charged with waging war. Finally,
lation or capitulation of enemy forces, the war machine does not
speaking like Kant, we would say that the relation between war and the
necessarily have war as its object (for example, the raid can be seen
war machine is necessary but “synthetic” (Yahweh is necessary for the
as another object, rather than as a particular form of war). But more
synthesis).

generally, we have seen that the war machine was the invention of
The question of war, in turn, is pushed further back and is sub-
the nomad, because it is in its essence the constitutive element of
ordinated to the relations between the war machine and the State
smooth space, the occupation of this space, displacement within this
apparatus. States were not the first to make war: war, of course, is not a
space, and the corresponding composition of people: this is its sole
phenomenon one finds in the universality of Nature, as nonspecific
and veritable positive object (nomos). Make the desert, the steppe,
violence. But war is not the object of States, quite the contrary. The
grow: do not depopulate it, quite the contrary. If war necessarily
most archaic States do not even seem to have had a war machine, and
results, it is because the war machine collides with States and cities,
their domination, as we will see, was based on other agencies (compris-
as forces (of striation) opposing its positive object: from then on, the
ing, rather, the police and prisons). It is safe to assume that the inter-
94
95
 
vention of an extrinsic or nomad war machine h a t counterattacked
State apparatus survive that is capable of exploiting them directly,
and destroyed the archaic but powerful States was one of the mys-
at the risk of becoming, sooner or later, simply a new dynasty of that
terious reasons for their sudden annihilation. But the State learns
apparatus: sooner or later because Genghis Khan and his followers were
fast. One of the biggest questions from the point of view of universal
able to hold out for a long time by partially integrating themselves
history is: How will the State appropriate the war machine, that is,
into the conquered empires, while at the same time maintaining a
constit u t e one for itself, in conformity with its size, its domina-
smooth space on the steppes to which the imperial centers were subordi-
tion, and its aims? And w i t h what risks? (What we call a mili-
nated. That was their genius, the Pax Mongolica. It remains the case
tary institution, or army, is not at a l l the war machine in itself,
that the integration of the nomads into the conquered empires was
but the form under which it is appropriated by the State.) In order
one of the most powerful factors of appropriation of the war machine
to grasp the paradoxical character of such an undertaking. we must
by the State apparatus: the inevitable danger to which the nomads
recapitulate the hypothesis in its entirety. (1) The war machine is
succumbed. But there is another danger as well, the one threaten-
that nomad invention that in fact has war not as its primary object
ing the State when it appropriates the war machine (all States have
but as its second-order, supplementary or synthetic objective, in the
felt the weight of this danger, as well as the risks this appropriation
sense that it is determined in such a way as to destroy the State-form
represents for them). Tamerlane is the extreme example. He was not
and city-form with which it collides. (2) When the State appropriates
Genghis Khan’s successor but his exact opposite: it was Tamerlane
the war machine, the latter obviously changes in nature and function,
who constructed a fantastic war machine turned back against the
since it is afterward directed against the nomad and all State destroy-
nomads, but who, by that very fact, was obliged to erect a State ap-
ers, or else expresses relations between States, to the extent that a State
paratus all the heavier and more unproductive since it existed only
undertakes exclusively to destroy another State or impose its aims upon
as the empty form of appropriation of that machine. Turning the
it. (3) It is precisely after the war machine has been appropriated by the
war machine back against the nomads may constitute for the State a
State in this way that it tends to take war for its direct and primary
danger as great as that presented by nomads directing the war ma-
object, for its ‘”analytic” object (and that war tends to take the battle for
chine against States.

its object). In short, it is at one and the same time that the State ap-
A second type of problem concerns the concrete forms the ap-
paratus appropriates a war machine, that the war machine takes war as
propriation of the war machine takes: Mercenary or territorial? A
its object, and that war becomes subordinated to the aims of the State.

professional army or a conscripted army? A special body or national
This question of appropriation is so varied historically that it is
recruiting? Not only are these formulas not equivalent, but there
necessary to distinguish between several kinds of problems. The first
are all the possible mixes between them. Perhaps the most relevant
concerns the possibility of the operation: it is precisely because war is
distinction to make, or the most general one, would be: Is there
only the supplementary or synthetic object of the nomad war machine
merely “encastment” of the war machine, or “appropriation” proper?

that it experiences the hesitation that proves fatal to it, and that the
The capture of the war machine by the State apparatus took place
State apparatus for i t s part is able to lay hold of war and thus turn the
following two paths, by encasting a society of warriors (who arrived
war machine back against t h e nomads. The hesitation of the nomad is
from without or arose from within), or on the contrary by consti-
legendary: What is to be done with the lands conquered and crossed?

tuting it in accordance with rules corresponding to civil society as a
Return them to the desert, to the steppe, to open pastureland? Or let a
whole. Once again, there is passage and transition from one formula
96
97
 
to another. Last, the third type of problem concerns the means of
real wars seems to us to be of great importance, but only if a differ-
appropriation. We must consider from this standpoint the various
ent criterion than that of Clausewitz is applied. The pure Idea is not
data pertaining to the fundamental aspects of the State apparatus: ter-
that of the abstract elimination of the adversary but that of a war
ritoriality, work or public works, taxation. The constitution of a
machine that does not have war as its object and that only enter-
military institution or an army necessarily implies a territorializa-
tains a potential or supplementary synthetic relation with war. Thus
tion of the war machine, in other words, the granting of land (“co-
the nomad war machine does not appear to us to be one case of real
lonial” or domestic), which can take very diverse forms. But at the
war among others, as in Clausewitz, but on the contrary the content
same time, fiscal regimes determine both the nature of the services
adequate to the Idea, the invention of the Idea, with its own objects,
and taxes owed by the beneficiary warriors, and especially the kind
space, and composition of the nomas. Nevertheless it is still an Idea,
of civil tax to which all or part of society is subject for the mainte-
and it is necessary to retain the concept of the pure Idea, even though
nance of the army. And the State enterprise of public works must be
this war machine was realized by the nomads. It is the nomads, rather,
reorganized along the lines of a “laying out of the territory” in which
who remain an abstraction, an Idea, something real and nonactual, and
the army plays a determining role, not only in the case of fortresses
for several reasons: first, because the elements of nomadism, as we have
and fortified cities, but also in strategic communication, the logistical
seen, enter into de facto mixes with elements of migration, itinerancy,
structure, the industrial infrastructure, etc. (the role and function of
and transhumance; this does not affect the purity of the concept, but
the Engineer in this form of appropriation).

introduces always mixed objects, or combinations of space and com-
Let us compare this hypothesis as a whole with Clausewitz’s for-
position, which react back upon the war machine from the beginning.

mula: “War is the continuation of politics by other means.” As we
Second, even in the purity of its concept, the nomad war machine
know, this formula is itself extracted from a theoretical and practical,
necessarily effectuates its synthetic relation with war as supplement,
historic and transhistoric, aggregate whose parts are interconnected.

uncovered and developed in opposition to the State-form, the destruc-
(I) There is a pure concept of war as absolute, unconditioned war,
tion of which is at issue. But that is exactly it; it does not effectuate
an Idea not given in experience (bring down or “upset” the en-
this supplementary object or this synthetic relation without the State,
emy, who is assumed to have no other determination, with no po-
for its part, finding the opportunity to appropriate the war machine,
litical, economic, or social considerations entering in). (2) What is
and the means of making war the direct object of this turned-around
given are real wars as submitted to State aims; States arc better or
machine (thus the integration of the nomad into the State is a vector
worse “conductors” in relation to absolute war, and in any ease con-
traversing nomadism from the very beginning, from the first act of war
dition its realization in experience. (3) Real wars swing between
against the State).

two poles, both subject to State politics: the war of annihilation,
The question is therefore less the realization of war than the ap-
which can escalate to total war (depending on the objectives of the
propriation of the war machine. It is at the same time that the State
annihilation) and tends to approach the unconditioned concept via
apparatus appropriates the war machine, subordinates it to its “po-
an ascent to extremes; and limited war, which is no “less” a war, but
litical” aims, and gives it war as its direct object. And it is one and
one that effects a descent toward limiting conditions, and can de-
the same historical tendency that causes State to evolve from a triple
escalate to mere “armed observation.”107
point of view: going from figures of encastment to forms of appropria-
In the first place, the distinction between absolute war as Idea and
tion proper, going from limited war to so-called total war, and trans-
98
99
 
forming the relation between aim and object. The factors that make
means adapted to that machine. This is the point at which Clausewitz’s
Stale war total war are closely connected to capitalism: it has to do
formula is effectively reversed; to be entitled to say that politics is the
with the investment of constant capital in equipment, industry,
continuation of war by other means, it is not enough to invert the order
and the war economy, and the investment of variable capital in the
of the words as if they could be spoken in either direction; it is neces-
population in its physical and mental aspects (both as warmaker
sary to follow the real movement at the conclusion of which the States,
and as victim of war). Total war is not only a war of annihilation
having appropriated a war machine, and having adapted it to their aims,
but arises when annihilation takes as its “center” not only the en-
reimpart a war machine that takes charge of the aim, appropriates the
emy army, or the enemy State, but the entire population and its
States, and assumes increasingly wider political functions.’
economy. The fact that this double investment can be made only
Doubtless, the present situation is highly discouraging. We have
under prior conditions of limited war illustrates the irresistible
watched the war machine grow stronger and stronger, as in a sci-
character of the capitalist tendency to develop total war. It is therefore
ence fiction story; we have seen it assign as its objective a peace
true that total war remains subordinated to State political aims and
still more terrifying than fascist death; we have seen it maintain or
merely realizes the maximal conditions of the appropriation of the
instigate the most terrible of local wars as parts of itself; we have
war machine by the State apparatus. But it is also true that when total
seen it set its sights on a new type of enemy, no longer another
war becomes the object of the appropriated war machine, then at this
State, or even another regime, but the “unspecified enemy”; we have
level in the set of all possible conditions, the object and the aim enter
seen it put its counterguerrilla elements into place, so that it can be
into new relations that can reach the point of contradiction. This ex-
caught by surprise once, but not twice. Yet the very conditions that
plains Clausewitz’s vacillation when he asserts at one point that total
make the State or World war machine possible, in other words, con-
war remains a war conditioned by the political aim of States, and at an-
stant capital (resources and equipment) and human variable capi-
other that it tends to effectuate the Idea of unconditioned war. In effect,
tal, continually recreate unexpected possibilities for counterattack,
the aim remains essentially political and determined as such by the
unforeseen initiatives determining revolutionary, popular, minor-
State, but the object itself has become unlimited. We could say that the
ity, mutant machines. The definition of the Unspecified Enemy
appropriation has changed direction, or rather that States tend to un-
testifies to this: “multiform, maneuvering and omnipresent. . . of
leash, reconstitute, an immense war machine of which they are no lon-
the moral, political, subversive or economic order, etc.,” the unas-
ger anything more than the opposable or apposed parts. This world-
signable material Saboteur or human Deserter assuming the most
wide war machine, which in a way “reissues” from the States, displays
diverse forms.111 The first theoretical element of importance is the
two successive figures: first, that of fascism, which makes war an un-
fact that the war machine has many varied meanings, and this is pre-
limited movement with no other aim than itself; but fascism is only a
cisely because the war machine has an extremely variable relation
rough sketch, and the second, post fascist, figure is that of a war machine
to war itself. The war machine is not uniformly defined, and com-
that takes peace as its object directly, as the peace of Terror or Survival.

prises something other than increasing quantities of force. We have
The war machine reforms a smooth space that now claims to control, to
tried to define two poles of the war machine: at one pole, it takes war
surround the entire earth. Total war itself is surpassed, toward a form
for its object and forms a line of destruction prolongable to the lim-
of peace more terrifying still. The war machine has taken charge of the
its of the universe. But in all of the shapes it assumes here—limited
aim, worldwide order, and the States are now no more than objects or
war, total war, worldwide organization—war represents not at all the
101
 
supposed essence of the war machine but only, whatever the machine’s
rows from the other: the worst of the world war machines reconstitutes
power, either the set of conditions under which the States appropri-
a smooth space to surround and enclose the earth. But the earth asserts
ate the machine, even going so far as to project it as the horizon of
its own powers of deterritorialization, its lines of flight, its smooth
the world, or the dominant order of which the States themselves are
spaces that live and blaze their way for a new earth. The question is
now only parts. The other pole seemed to be the essence; it is when
not one of quantities but of the incommensurable character of the
the war machine, with infinitely lower “quantities,” has as its object
quantities that confront one another in the two kinds of war machine,
not war but the drawing of a creative line of flight, the composition
according to the two poles. War machines take shape against the appara-
of a smooth space and of the movement of people in that space. At
tuses that appropriate the machine and make war their affair and their
this other pole, the machine does indeed encounter war, but as its
object: they bring connections to bear against the great conjunction of
supplementary or synthetic object, now directed against the State and
the apparatuses of capture or domination against the worldwide axiomatic expressed by States.

We thought it possible to assign the invention of the war machine
to the nomads. This was done only in the historical interest of dem-
onstrating that the war machine as such was invented, even if it dis-
played from the beginning all of the ambiguity that caused it to enter
into composition with the other pole, and swing toward it from the
start. However, in conformity with the essence, the nomads do not
hold the secret: an “ideological,” scientific, or artistic movement can
be a potential war machine, to the precise extent to which it draws, in
relation to a phylum, a plane of consistency, a creative line of flight,
a smooth space of displacement. It is not the nomad who defines this
constellation of characteristics; it is this constellation that defines
the nomad, and at the same time the essence of the war machine. If
guerrilla warfare, minority warfare, revolutionary and popular war
are in conformity with the essence, it is because they take war as an
object all the more necessary for being merely “supplementary”: they
can make war only on the condition that they simultaneously create
something else, if only new nonorganic social relations. The difference
between the two poles is great, even, and especially, from the point of
view of death: the line of flight that creates, or turns into a line of
destruction; the plane of consistency that constitutes itself, even piece
by piece, or turns into a plan(e) of organization and domination. We
are constantly reminded that there is communication between these
two lines or planes, that each takes nourishment from the other, bor-
102

It should not be concluded that
war is a state of nature, but
rather that it is the mode of a
social state that wards off and
prevents the State.